With the development of automated vehicles, 
 American creativity and innovation hold the potential to 
 once again transform mobility.
AV 3.0
 is the beginning of a national discussion 
 about the future of our surface transportation system. 
 Your voice is essential to shaping this future.
Preparing for the 
 Future of Transportation
Automated Vehicles 3.0
LETTER FROM THE SECRETARY
Secretary Elaine L. Chao
U.S. Department of Transportation
America has always been a leader in 
transportation innovation. From the mass 

production of automobiles to global positioning 

system navigation, American ingenuity has 

transformed how we travel and connect 

with one another. With the development of 

automated vehicles, American creativity and 

innovation hold the potential to once again 

transform mobility.
Automation has the potential to improve 
our quality of life and enhance the mobility 

and independence of millions of Americans, 

especially older Americans and people 
 
with disabilities.
Moreover, the integration of automation across 
our transportation system has the potential 

to increase productivity and facilitate freight 

movement. But most importantly, automation 



by reducing crashes caused by human error, 

including crashes involving impaired or 

distracted drivers, and saving lives.

automation brings new challenges that need 

to be addressed. The public has legitimate 
concerns about the safety, security, and 

privacy of automated technology. So I have 

challenged Silicon Valley and other innovators 

to step up and help address these concerns 



of automation. In addition, incorporating these 

technologies into our transportation systems 

may impact industries, creating new kinds 

of jobs. This technology evolution may also 



new skills and take on new roles. As a society, 

we must help prepare workers for this transition. 
The U.S. Department of Transportation is 
taking active steps to prepare for the future 

by engaging with new technologies to ensure 

safety without hampering innovation. With 

the release of 
Automated Driving Systems 

2.0: A Vision for Safety
 in September 2017, 

the Department provided voluntary guidance 

to industry, as well as technical assistance 

and best practices to States, offering a path 

forward for the safe testing and integration of 

automated driving systems. The Department 

also bolstered its engagement with the 

automotive industry, technology companies, 
ii     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
and other key transportation stakeholders and 
innovators to continue to develop a policy 

framework that facilitates the safe integration of 

this technology into our transportation systems.
Preparing for the Future of Transportation: 
Automated Vehicles 3.0 (AV 3.0)
 is another 

milestone in the Department™s development 



framework for multimodal automation. It 







also communicates the Department™s agenda 






The Department is committed to engaging 
stakeholders to identify and solve policy issues. 


Automated Driving 

Systems 2.0: A Vision for Safety,
 the Department 

has sought input on automation issues from 



wide range of forums including formal Requests 
for Information and Comments. In March 





Principles and discuss automation issues 



stakeholders across every mode. The ideas and 





goal of the Department is to keep pace with 





technology.
AV 3.0


system. Your voice is essential to shaping 
 
this future.
 Working together, we can 
help usher in a new era of 

transportation innovation 

and safety, and ensure 
 that our country remains 
 a global leader in 
 automated technology.
PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    iiiU.S. DOT AUTOMATION PRINCIPLES
The United States Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT) has established a clear and consistent Federal approach to shaping 

1. We will prioritize safety. 
Automation offers the potential to improve safety for vehicle operators and occupants, pedestrians, bicyclists, motorcyclists, 

and other travelers sharing the road. However, these technologies may also introduce new safety risks. U.S. DOT will lead 

efforts to address potential safety risks and advance the life-saving potential of automation, which will strengthen public 


2. We will remain technology neutral.


neutral policies that promote competition and innovation as a means to achieve safety, mobility, and economic goals. 
 

 
mobility solutions.
3. We will modernize regulations. 
U.S. DOT will modernize or eliminate outdated regulations that unnecessarily impede the development of automated vehicles 

or that do not address critical safety needs. Whenever possible, the Department will support the development of voluntary, 


 U.S. DOT will seek rules that are as nonprescriptive and performance-based as possible. 
As a starting point and going forward, 



iv     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
4. We will encourage a consistent regulatory and operational environment. 

compliance challenges. U.S. DOT will promote regulatory consistency so that automated vehicles can operate seamlessly across the 

Nation. The Department will build consensus among State and local transportation agencies and industry stakeholders on technical 

standards and advance policies to support the integration of automated vehicles throughout the transportation system.   
5. We will prepare proactively for automation. 
U.S. DOT will provide guidance, best practices, pilot programs, and other assistance to help our partners plan and make the 





assume universal implementation of any particular approach.
6. We will protect and enhance the freedoms enjoyed by Americans. 
U.S. DOT embraces the freedom of the open road, which includes the freedom for Americans to drive their own vehicles. We 

envision an environment in which automated vehicles operate alongside conventional, manually-driven vehicles and other road 

users. We will protect the ability of consumers to make the mobility choices that best suit their needs. We will support automation 


 and older Americans. 
 PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    vSAE AUTOMATION LEVELS  
0  No Automation
The full-time 
performance by the 

human driver
 of all 
aspects of the 
dynamic 

driving task,
 even when 
enhanced by warning or 

intervention systems.
1  Driver Assistance
The 
driving mode-


a driver assistance 

system of either 

steering or acceleration/

deceleration using 

information about the 

driving environment and 



that the 
human driver 

perform all remaining 

aspects of the 
dynamic 

driving task.
2  Partial Automation
 The 
driving mode-


one or more driver 

assistance systems 

of both steering 

or acceleration/

deceleration using 

information about the 

driving environment and 



that the 
human driver 

perform all remaining 

aspects of the 
dynamic 

driving task.
3  Conditional
 Automation
The 
driving mode
-

an 
automated driving 
system
 of all aspects of 
the 
dynamic driving 
 task

that the 
human driver 
 will respond 

appropriately to a 

request to intervene.
4  High Automation 
The 
driving mode
-

an 
automated driving 
system
 of all aspects 
of the 
dynamic driving 

task,
 even if a 
human 
driver 
does not respond 
appropriately to a 

request to intervene.
 5  Full Automation 
The full-time 

performance by an 

automated driving 

system
 of all aspects 
of the 
dynamic driving
 
task
 under all roadway 
and environmental 

conditions that can 
 be managed by a 

human driver.

for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for 
On-Road Motor Vehicles (Warrendale: SAE International, 

15 June 2018), https://www.sae.org/standards/content/

j3016_201806/.
A Note on Terminology

variety of terms (e.g., self-driving, autonomous, driverless, highly automated) have been used by industry, government, and 

observers to describe various forms of automation in surface transportation. While no terminology is correct or incorrect, this 




vi     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
1  CONTENTS
 Letter from the Secretary
 . . . . . . . . . . .
ii U.S. DOT Automation Principles
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iv SAE Automation Levels
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi A Note on Terminology
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vi Executive Summary
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
viii Operating Administrations
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi  Automation and Safety
 . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1 Roles in Automation
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
5 The Federal Government and Automation
  . . . . . . . . .5  Integrating Safety into
   Surface Transportation Automation
  . . . . . . . . . . .5  The Federal Role in Automation Research
 . . . . . . . 
13  U.S. DOT Role in Key Cross-Cutting Policy Issues
 . . . 
13 State, Local, and Tribal Governments and Automation
 . . 
18
  Best Practices for State Legislatures and
 
  . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
  Considerations for Infrastructure 
   Owners and Operators
  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20    
Considerations for State Commercial Vehicle 
    Enforcement Agencies
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
22   
Considerations for Public Sector Transit Industry 
    and Stakeholders
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
22   

  . . . . . .24   
State, Local, and Tribal Roles in
    Transportation Sector Cybersecurity
 . . . . . . . . 
24  The Private Sector and Automation
 . . . . . . . . . . 
25The Road Ahead
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
35  Automation Implementation Strategies
 . . . . . . . . 
35
  Safety Risk Management Stages along the Path to
    Full Commercial Integration
 . . . . . . . . . . . . 
36
  Moving Forward
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
40
   
Learning from the History of Automation
    in the Aviation Workforce
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
42 
 A: Key Terms and Acronyms
  . . . . . . . . . . . .45 
 B: Stakeholder Engagement
  . . . . . . . . . . . .48 
 C: Voluntary Technical Standards for Automation
 49 PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    viiEXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Preparing for the Future of Transportation: 
Automated Vehicles 3.0 (AV 3.0) 
advances U.S. 

DOT™s commitment to supporting the safe, 



of automation into the broader multimodal 

surface transportation system. 
AV 3.0
 builds 


guidance provided in 
Automated Driving 

Systems 2.0: A Vision for Safety.
Automation technologies are new and rapidly 
evolving. The right approach to achieving 

safety improvements begins with a focus on 

removing unnecessary barriers and issuing 

voluntary guidance, rather than regulations 


In 
AV 3.0,
 U.S. DOT™s surface transportation 
operating administrations come together for 


statement on automation. This document 

incorporates feedback from manufacturers 

and technology developers, infrastructure 

owners and operators, commercial motor 

carriers, the bus transit industry, and State and 

local governments.
2 This document considers 
automation broadly, addressing all levels of 

automation (SAE automation Levels 1 to 5), and 

recognizes multimodal interests in the full range 

of capabilities this technology can offer.
3AV 3.0

DOT programs and policies on automation 



Department translates these principles into 
action 
(see facing page).
AV 3.0 Provides New Multimodal 
Safety Guidance
 
automation principle, 
AV 3.0
 outlines how 
automation will be safely integrated across 

passenger vehicles, commercial vehicles, 
 
on-road transit, and the roadways on which 
 

AV 3.0:  

A Vision 
for Safety 2.0
 and encourages automated 
driving system developers to make their 
Voluntary Safety Self-Assessments public to 


 the technology.
Ł Provides considerations and best practices 
for State and local governments to support 

the safe and effective testing and operation 

of automation technologies. 
Ł Supports the development of voluntary 
technical standards and approaches as an 

effective non-regulatory means to advance 

the integration of automation technologies 

into the transportation system.
Ł Describes an illustrative framework of safety 
risk management stages along the path to 

full commercial integration of automated 

vehicles. This framework promotes the 



risk and provides clarity to the public 

regarding the distinctions between various 

stages of testing and full deployment.

to preserve the ability for transportation 



spectrum.  


for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road 
Motor Vehicles (Warrendale: SAE International, 15 June 2018), 

https://www.sae.org/standards/content/j3016_201806/.
viii     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
 Automation Principles and Implementation Strategies
STRATEGIES
Stakeholder 
 engagement
Best 
practices
Voluntary 
standards
Targeted 
 research
Regulatory 
 modernization
PRINCIPLES
AV 3.0

AV 3.0
 responds to issues raised by 
stakeholders and includes the following key 

Ł States that U.S. DOT will interpret and, 
 consistent with all applicable notice 
and comment requirements, adapt the 


 to recognize that such terms do not 
 
 include an automated system.
Ł Recognizes that given the rapid increase in 
automated vehicle testing activities in many 

locations, there is no need for U.S. DOT to 

favor particular locations or to pick winners 

and losers. Therefore, the Department 

no longer recognizes the designations of 



announced on January 19, 2017.
Ł Urges States and localities to work to 




vehicle technologies and to support 

interoperability. 

motor vehicle safety standards that allow for 


 such as vehicles without steering wheels, 



approach may require a more fundamental 



Safety Administration™s (NHTSA) approach 

to safety standards for application to 

automated vehicles. 



approval, as the way to balance and 

promote safety and innovation; U.S. DOT will 

continue to advance this approach with the 

international community.  
PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    

Administration will provide transit agencies 

with tailored technical assistance as they 

develop an appropriate safety management 

system approach to ensuring safe testing 

and deployment of automated transit bus 

systems.
AV 3.0 Outlines How to Work 
with U.S. DOT as Automation 

Technology Evolves

collaboration among the private sector, State and 

local agencies, and U.S. DOT on issues ranging 

from accessibility to workforce development to 


AV 3.0:
Ł Announces a forthcoming notice of 
proposed rulemaking, which includes the 



that are relevant only 
when human drivers are present

automated driving system (ADS)-equipped 

vehicles. 
Ł Informs stakeholders that U.S. DOT will seek 
public comment on a proposal to streamline 

and modernize the procedures NHTSA 
will follow when processing and deciding 



automation research.
Ł Informs stakeholders of the Federal Motor 
Carrier Safety Administration™s (FMCSA) 

intent to initiate an Advance Notice of 

Proposed Rulemaking to better understand 

areas of responsibility between the State and 



equipped commercial motor vehicles and 

commercial carriers. 
Ł States that FMCSA will also consider changes 
to its motor carrier safety regulations to 

accommodate the integration of ADS-

equipped commercial motor vehicles.
Ł Informs stakeholders that U.S. DOT plans to 


Control Devices, taking new technologies 

into consideration.

standards being developed through 

standards development organizations 
 and associations.
Ł Announces a study of the workforce impacts 
of automated vehicles, in collaboration 

among U.S. DOT, U.S. Department of Labor, 

U.S. Department of Commerce, 
 and the U.S. Department of Health and 

Human Services.
U.S. DOT™s Operating 
Administrations are United in Their 

Commitment to Safety
We act as ﬁOne DOTﬂ in pursuing strategies to 
successfully integrate automation technologies 

into the transportation system. The operating 

administrations shown on the facing page 
contributed to 
AV 3.0.
Each of these U.S. DOT operating 
administrations actively encourages the 

integration of automation in ways guided by 

the U.S. DOT™s automation principles and 

strategies noted above.
4 AV 3.0 
 focuses on the 
automation of motor vehicles on roadways and 

the roles of NHTSA, FMCSA, FHWA, and FTA, 

with consideration of intermodal points (e.g., 

motor vehicles at ports and highway-rail grade 

crossings).  
    PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
4 See https://www.transportation.gov/av for more information on 
automation efforts at U.S. DOT. 
 OPERATING ADMINISTRATIONS
 For more information on how U.S. DOT agencies engage with automation, see www.transportation.gov/av
Federal Highway 
Administration
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) is 
responsible for providing stewardship over the 

construction, maintenance, and preservation of the 

Nation™s highways, bridges, and tunnels. Through 

research and technical assistance, the FHWA supports 

its partners in Federal, State, and local agencies to 

accelerate innovation and improve safety and mobility.
Federal Motor Carrier
 Safety Administration
The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration™s 

(FMCSA) mission is to reduce crashes, injuries, and 

fatalities involving large trucks and buses. FMCSA 

partners with industry, safety advocates, and State 

and local governments to keep the Nation™s roads 

safe and improve commercial motor vehicle (CMV) 

safety through regulation, education, enforcement, 

research, and technology.
Federal Aviation 
Administration
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) provides 




approaching a billion passengers.
Federal Railroad 
Administration
The Federal Railroad Administration™s (FRA) 
 
movement of people and goods for a strong 
 America. FRA is advancing the use of new 
 technology in rail.
Federal Transit 
Administration
The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) provides 

 transit systems, including buses, subways, light 
 rail, commuter rail, trolleys, and ferries. FTA also 

oversees safety measures and helps develop 
 
Maritime 
 Administration
The Maritime Administration (MARAD) promotes 
 the use of waterborne transportation and its 
 seamless integration with other segments of the 

transportation system, and the viability of the 
 U.S. merchant marine.

Safety Administration

(NHTSA) mission is to save lives, prevent injuries, and 



through education, research, safety standards, and 

enforcement activity. NHTSA carries out highway 

safety programs by setting and enforcing safety 

performance standards for motor vehicles and 

equipment, identifying safety defects, and through 

the development and delivery of effective highway 

safety programs for State and local jurisdictions.
Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety 

Administration
The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) protects people and the 

environment by advancing the safe transportation 

of energy and other hazardous materials that are 

essential to our daily lives. To do this, PHMSA 

establishes national policy, sets and enforces 

standards, educates, and conducts research to 

prevent incidents.
PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
     Automated vehicles that accurately detect, recognize, anticipate, 
 and respond to the movements of all transportation system users 
 could lead to breakthrough gains in transportation safety.
  INTRODUCTION: AUTOMATION AND SAFETY
The United States surface transportation system 


widespread access to jobs, goods, and services. 

It also connects many remote regions of the 





as motor vehicle crashes remain a leading cause 

of death, with an estimated 37,133 lives lost on 

U.S. roads in 2017. Traditional safety programs 



safer than in the past, but there is much room to 


Automated vehicles that accurately detect, 
recognize, anticipate, and respond to the 

movements of all transportation system 

users could lead to breakthrough gains in 

transportation safety. Unlike human drivers, 

automation technologies are not prone to 

distraction, fatigue, or impaired driving, which 



transportation fatalities. Automated vehicle 

technologies that are carefully integrated into 
motor vehicles could help vehicle operators 

detect and avoid bicyclists, motorcyclists, 

pedestrians, and other vulnerable users on our 

roadways, and increase safety across the surface 

transportation system. Their potential to reduce 

deaths and injuries on the Nation™s roadways 

cannot be overstated.
Automated vehicles rely on sensors and 


environment across a range of lighting and 

weather conditions. They can quickly learn and 

adapt to new driving situations by learning 



updates. Fully realizing the life-saving potential 

of automated vehicles, however, will require 

careful risk management as new technologies 

are introduced and adopted across the surface 

transportation system. 
To support the deployment of safe automation 
technologies, the Department released 
A Vision 

for Safety 2.0
 in September 2017, which included 

12 automated driving system (ADS) safety 
elements to help industry partners analyze, 

identify, and resolve safety considerations using 



voluntary guidance outlined in 
A Vision for Safety 
2.0
 on the design, testing, and safe deployment 
of ADS remains central to U.S. DOT™s approach. 

ADS developers are encouraged to use 

these safety elements to publish safety self-

assessments to describe to the public how they 

are identifying and addressing potential safety 

issues. 
On-road testing and early deployments are 
important to improving automated vehicle 

performance and allowing them to reach their 

full performance potential. Careful real-world 

testing allows developers to identify and rapidly 





must be addressed through the application of 

robust systems engineering processes, testing 

protocols, and functional safety best practices, 

such as those documented in 
A Vision for Safety 
 INTRODUCTION: AUTOMATION AND SAFETY
    12.0.
5 However, delaying or unduly hampering 

 
delaying the realization of global reductions 
 in risk.
AV 3.0
 maintains U.S. DOT™s primary focus on 

aspects and modes of surface transportation. 

AV 3.0
 introduces a comprehensive, multimodal 
approach toward safely integrating automation. 
 AV 3.0
 introduces a 
 comprehensive, multimodal 
approach toward safely 
 integrating automation. 
5 As documented in 
A Vision for Safety 2.0,
 ADS developers 
should consider employing systems engineering guidance, 
best practices, design principles, and standards developed 

by established and accredited standards-developing 

organizations (as applicable) such as the International 

Standards Organization (ISO) and SAE International as well 

as standards and processes available from other industries, 

such as aviation, space, and the military and other applicable 

standards or internal company processes as they are relevant 

and applicable. They should also consider available and 

emerging approaches to risk mitigation, such as methodologies 

that focus on functional safety (e.g., ISO 26262) and safety of the 

intended functionality. 
2     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION   
 Safety by the Numbers
Ł An estimated 
39,141
 people lost their lives 
on all modes of our transportation system in 2017. The vast 

A,B
Ł In 2017, 
82 percent
  of victims in fatal large 
truck 
crashes were road users who were not an occupant of the truck(s) 

involved.
BŁ Driver Factors: 
Of all serious motor vehicle crashes, 
 94 percent
  involve driver-related factors, such as 
impaired driving, distraction, and speeding or illegal maneuvers. 
  In 2017:
Ł Professional Drivers: 
Professional drivers are 
ten times
 more likely to be killed on the job, and nearly nine times more likely 

to be injured on the job compared to the average worker.
CŁ Nearly 
11,000
 fatalities involved drinking 
 and driving.
B Ł Speeding was a factor in nearly 
10,000
   highway fatalities.
BŁ Pedestrians:
 5,977
 pedestrians were killed by 
 motor vehicles in 2017, representing 16 percent of all motor 
 vehicle fatalities.
BŁ Nearly 
3,500
 fatal crashes* involved distracted drivers
.BŁ Highway-Rail Grade Crossings: 
Over the past decade, highway 
rail grade crossing 
fatalities averaged 
253
 per year, 
representing 
about one-third of total railroad-related fatalities.
AŁ Commercial Vehicles:
 13 
percent
 of annual
 roadway fatalities occur in crashes involving large trucks.
B Sources: 
A U.S. Department of Transportation, Bureau of Transportation Statistics, special tabulation, 
September 8, 2018 
B NHTSA 2017 Fatal Motor Vehicle Crashes: Overview  (DOT HS 812 603)
C Beede, David, Regina Powers, and Cassandra Ingram, 
The Employment Impact of Autonomous 
Vehicles, 
U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC: http://www.esa.doc.gov/sites/

* This number is likely underreported.
 INTRODUCTION: AUTOMATION AND SAFETY
    3 Only by working in partnership can the public and the private sector 
improve the safety, security, and accessibility of automation 
 technologies and address the concerns of the general public.
ROLES IN AUTOMATION 
The traditional roles of the Federal 


and private industry are well suited for 

addressing automation. The Federal 



safety performance of vehicles and vehicle 

equipment, as well as their commercial 

operation in interstate commerce, while States 

and local governments play the lead role in 

licensing drivers, establishing rules of the 

road, and formulating policy in tort liability 

and insurance. Private industry remains a 

primary source of transportation research 

investment and commercial technology 



not unnecessarily impede such innovation. The 

Department relies on partners to play their 

respective roles, while continuing to encourage 

open dialogue and frequent engagement. 
The Department seeks to address policy 
uncertainty and provide clear mechanisms by 

which partners can participate and engage with 

the U.S. DOT.
The Federal Government 
 and Automation
U.S. DOT™s role in transportation automation 

is to ensure the safety and mobility of the 

traveling public while fostering economic 

growth. As a steward of the Nation™s roadway 





automated vehicles can be safely and effectively 



system, alongside conventional vehicles, 

pedestrians, bicyclists, motorcyclists, and other 

road users. U.S. DOT also has an interest in 

supporting innovations that improve safety, 

reduce congestion, improve mobility, and 

increase access to economic opportunity for all 

Americans. Finally, by partnering with industry 

in adopting market-driven, technology-neutral 

policies that encourage innovation in the 

transportation system, the Department seeks to 

fuel economic growth and support job creation 

and workforce development.
To accomplish these goals, the Department 
works closely with stakeholders in the private 
and public sectors to pursue the following 

activities: 
Ł Establish performance-oriented, consensus-
based, and voluntary standards and 

guidance for vehicle and infrastructure 

safety, mobility, and operations.
Ł Conduct targeted research to support the 
safe integration of automation.
Ł Identify and remove regulatory barriers to 
the safe integration of automated vehicles.
Ł Ensure national consistency for travel in 
interstate commerce.
Ł Educate the public on the capabilities and 
limitations of automated vehicles.
Integrating Safety into Surface 
Transportation Automation
Each operating administration has its respective 
area of authority over improving the safety of 

the Nation™s transportation system. Assuring 

the safety of automated vehicles will not only 

rely on the validation of the technology, such as 

the hardware, software, and components, but 

it will also depend on appropriate operating 
  ROLES IN AUTOMATION: FEDERAL
    5rules, roadway conditions, and emergency 
response protocols. The following sections 

outline the primary authorities and policy 



Administration (NHTSA), Federal Motor Carrier 

Safety Administration (FMCSA), Federal Highway 

Administration (FHWA), and Federal Transit 

Administration (FTA) to demonstrate how the 

U.S. DOT is incorporating safety throughout 

the surface transportation system as it relates 

to automated vehicles. These sections also 

discuss ADS-equipped vehicles (SAE automation 

Levels 3 to 5) and lower level technologies (SAE 

automation Levels 0 to 2), depending on the role 

of each operating administration and its current 

engagement with automation.      
NHTSA Authorities and 
 Key Policy Issues
Safety Authority Over ADS-Equipped 
 Vehicles and Equipment
NHTSA has broad authority over the safety of 

ADS-equipped vehicles and other automated 

vehicle technologies equipped in motor vehicles. 

NHTSA has authority to establish Federal safety 

standards for new motor vehicles introduced into 

interstate commerce in the United States, and 



motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment used 
in the United States.
6 The latter authority focuses 
on the obligations that Federal law imposes on 

the manufacturers of motor vehicles and motor 

vehicle equipment to notify NHTSA of safety 

defects in those vehicles or vehicle equipment 

and to remedy the defects, subject to NHTSA™s 

oversight and enforcement authority.
7Under Federal law, no State or local government 

may enforce a law on the safety performance of 

a motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment that 

differs in any way from the Federal standard.
8 The preemptive force of the Federal safety 





with the Federal safety standard does not 



at common law, including tort liability for harm 



preemption may apply.
9 The Federal standard 
would supersede if the effect of a State law 

tort claim would be to impose a performance 

standard on a motor vehicle or equipment 

manufacturer that is inconsistent with the 

Federal standard.
10
NHTSA™s application of Federal safety standards 

to the performance of ADS-equipped vehicles 
6 49 U.S.C. §§ 30111 and 30166.
7 49 U.S.C. § 30118(c).

8 49 U.S.C. § 30103(b).

9 49 U.S.C. § 30103(e).

10 See 
Geier v. American Honda Motor Co.,
 529 U.S. 861 (2000).
and equipment is likely to raise questions about 
preemption and the future complementary 



Department will carefully consider these 

jurisdictional questions as NHTSA develops 

its regulatory approach to ADS and other 

automated vehicle technologies so as to strike 

the appropriate balance between the Federal 



the safe design and operational performance 

of an ADS-equipped vehicle and the State and 

local authorities™ use of their traditional powers.
Federal Safety Standards for 
 ADS-Equipped Vehicles
Several NHTSA safety standards for motor 

vehicles assume a human occupant will be 

able to control the operation of the vehicle, 

and many standards incorporate performance 

requirements and test procedures geared 

toward ensuring safe operation by a human 

driver. Some standards focus on the safety 

of drivers and occupants in particular seating 



requirements for the use of steering wheels, 

brakes, accelerator pedals, and other control 

features, as well as the visibility for a human 

driver of instrument displays, vehicle status 

indicators, mirrors, and other driving information. 
NHTSA™s current safety standards do not 
prevent the development, testing, sale, or 
6     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
use of ADS built into vehicles that maintain 
the traditional cabin and control features 
of human-operated vehicles. 
However, 
some Level 4 and 5 automated vehicles may 

be designed to be controlled entirely by an 

ADS, and the interior of the vehicle may be 



may be no steering wheel, accelerator pedal, 

brakes, mirrors, or information displays for 

human use. For such ADS-equipped vehicles, 

NHTSA™s current safety standards constitute an 

unintended regulatory barrier to innovation.
The Department, through NHTSA, intends to 
reconsider the necessity and appropriateness 

of its current safety standards as applied to 

ADS-equipped vehicles. 
In an upcoming 
rulemaking, NHTSA plans to seek comment 

on proposed changes to particular safety 

standards to accommodate automated 

vehicle technologies and the possibility of 

setting exceptions to certain standardsŠ
that 
are relevant only when human drivers are 
present
Šfor ADS-equipped vehicles.


more fundamental revamping of its approach to 

safety standards for application to automated 



approach, instead of type approval, more 

appropriately balances and promotes safety and 

innovation; U.S. DOT will continue to advance 

this approach with the international community. 






performance of different ADS concepts in new 


NHTSA recognizes that the accelerating 
pace of technological change, especially 

in the development of software used in 

ADS-equipped vehicles, requires a new 

approach to the formulation of the Federal 

Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS). 
The pace of innovation in automated vehicle 

technologies is incompatible with lengthy 

rulemaking proceedings and highly prescriptive 



standards. Future motor vehicle safety standards 



technology-neutral, and performance-oriented 

to accommodate rapid technological innovation. 

They may incorporate simpler and more general 

requirements designed to validate that an ADS 

can safely navigate the real-world roadway 

environment, including unpredictable hazards, 

obstacles, and interactions with other vehicles 

and pedestrians who may not always adhere 





a vehicle may be driven anywhere, but future 

standards will need to take into account that the 

operational design domain (ODD) for a particular 

ADS within a vehicle is likely to be limited in 

some ways that may be unique to that system. 



same ODD.
Performance-based safety standards could 

require manufacturers to use test methods, 

such as sophisticated obstacle-course-based 



ADS-equipped vehicles can reliably handle the 

normal range of everyday driving scenarios as 

well as unusual and unpredictable scenarios. 

Standards could be designed to account for 



roadway conditions within a given system™s ODD, 

as well as sudden and unpredictable actions by 

other road users. Test procedures could also 

be developed to ensure that an ADS does not 

operate outside of the ODD established by 

the manufacturer. Standards could provide for 





vehicles, pedestrians, and other obstacles that 

ADS-equipped vehicles would need to detect 

and avoid. Other approaches, such as computer 



of mathematical functions could be considered, 

as Federal law does not require that NHTSA™s 

safety standards rely on physical tests and 

measurements, only that they be objective, 

repeatable, and transparent. 
Exemptions from FMVSS for 
 ADS Purposes
NHTSA values a streamlined and modernized 



unnecessary delays. 
NHTSA intends to seek 
 ROLES IN AUTOMATION: FEDERAL
    7public comment on a proposal to streamline 
and modernize procedures the Agency 

will follow when processing and deciding 
exemption petitions.
 Among other things, the 
proposed changes will remove unnecessary 

delays in seeking public comment as part of the 



types of information needed to support such 

petitions. The statutory provision authorizing 





wide array of automated operations, particularly 

for manufacturers seeking to engage in research, 

testing, and demonstration projects.
11FMCSA Authorities and 
 Key Policy Issues
Safety Authority Over Commercial 
Motor Vehicle Operations, Drivers, and 

Maintenance
The Department, through FMCSA, regulates the 
safety of commercial motor carriers operating 



safety of commercial motor vehicle drivers, and 

the safe operation of commercial trucks and 

motor coaches.
12 The best way to accomplish 
FMCSA™s core mission of reducing fatalities and 

crashes involving large trucks and buses is to 

avoid unnecessary barriers to the development 

of ADS in commercial vehicles. 
As automation introduces new policy questions, 
FMCSA will work with (1) industry, State 

governments, and other partners to further the 

safe operation of ADS-equipped commercial 

vehicles, and (2) law enforcement, inspection 



techniques and protocols.


technology, demonstrate its capabilities, and 

socialize the idea of automated vehicles on 

the road with traditional vehicles, FMCSA will 

continue to hold public demonstrations of the 



demonstration on the I-66 Corridor co-hosted 



enforcement. 
FMCSA consults with NHTSA on matters related 
to motor carrier safety.
13 NHTSA and FMCSA 
have different but complementary authorities 

over the safety of commercial motor vehicles 

(CMVs) and commercial vehicle equipment. 



Federal safety standards for new motor vehicles, 

including trucks and motor coaches, and 

oversees actions that manufacturers take to 

remedy known safety defects in motor vehicles 

and motor vehicle equipment.
14
 NHTSA and 
FMCSA collaborate and consult to develop 

and enforce safety requirements that apply 

to the operation and maintenance of vehicles 





equipped commercial motor vehicles. FMCSA 

also works closely with States and private 

stakeholders to develop and enforce safety 

standards related to the inspection, maintenance, 

and repair of commercial motor vehicles.
12  
 49 U.S.C. § 31502; 49 U.S.C. chapter 311, subchapter III; 49 
U.S.C. chapter 313. Additional statutory authority includes the 
Hazardous Materials Transportation Uniform Safety Act of 1990 



51; and the ICC Termination Act of 1995 (Pub. L. 104-88, 109 



FMCSA™s statutory authority also authorizes the Agency™s 

enforcement of the Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMRs) 

and the Federal Motor Carrier Commercial Regulations 

(FMCCRs),.  49 U.S.C. chapter 311, subchapters I and III; chapter 

313; and section 31502
13 49 U.S.C. § 113(i).
14 See 49 U.S.C. §§ 30111 and 30166
11 
 49 U.S.C. § 30114
8     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
Operating ADS-Equipped CMVs under 




authority over the safe operation of the vehicle.
15  When driving decisions are made by an ADS 

rather than a human, FMCSA™s authority over 

the safe and proper operating condition of the 

vehicle and its safety inspection authority may 

be even more important, particularly between 

when ADS operations begin and when a 

revised regulatory framework is established. In 

addition, 
FMCSA retains its authority to take 
enforcement action if an automated system 

inhibits safe operation.
16   

whether the ADS-equipped CMV placed into 

operation complies with the requirements for 

parts and accessories for which there are no 



systems, and rear underride guards on single 

unit trucks). A motor carrier may not operate 



until it complies with the requirements and 



Accessories Necessary for Safe Operation. 
 If the ADS is installed aftermarket, any 

equipment that decreases the safety of 

operation could subject the motor carrier to 
a civil penalty.
17 In addition, ADS-equipped 
vehicles that create an ﬁimminent hazardﬂ may 

be placed out of service and the motor carrier 


18FMCSA will then consider whether the motor 

carrier has complied with the operational 

requirements of the current Federal Motor 

Carrier Safety Regulations (FMCSRs). These 



driving CMVs, including the laws, ordinances, 

and regulations of the jurisdiction in which the 

vehicle is operated. Notably, however, in the 

case of vehicles that do not require a human 



(i.e., drug testing, hours-of-service, commercial 



requirements) apply.  
If the motor carrier cannot fully comply with the 
FMCSRs through use of its ADS-equipped CMV, 


19 The 
carrier would need to demonstrate that the ADS-

equipped CMV likely achieves an equivalent 

level of safety. Ultimately, a motor carrier would 

not be permitted to operate an ADS-equipped 

CMV on public highways until it complies with 

the operational requirements or until the carrier 

obtains regulatory relief.
In general, subject to the development and 
deployment of safe ADS technologies, the 
Department™s policy is that going forward 

FMCSA regulations will no longer assume 

that the CMV driver is always a human or that 

a human is necessarily present onboard a 
commercial vehicle during its operation.
The Department and FMCSA are aware of 
the concerns that differing State regulations 

present for ADS technology development, 

testing, and deployment in interstate commerce. 
If FMCSA determines that State or local 

legal requirements may interfere with the 


preemptive authority. 
The Department works 

with State partners to promote compatible 

safety oversight programs. U.S. DOT will carefully 

consider the appropriate lines of preemption in 



vehicles and commercial carriers.
FMCSA also has authority, in coordination with 


required for CDLs
20
. States have an essential role 
in training commercial drivers and issuing CDLs, 

but they must follow the FMCSA regulations 



on CDLs in order to stay eligible for Federal 

grants
21. The Department will carefully consider 
the appropriate division of authority between 
15  
 49 U.S.C. §§ 31136(a)(1) and 31502(b)(1))
16 
 49 CFR 396.7(a).
17 49 CFR 393.3
18 
 49 U.S.C. § 5122(b); 49 CFR 386.72.
19 49 U.S.C. §§ 31315 and 31136(e).
20 49 U.S.C. § 31136(a)(3).
21 Section 4124 of Public Law 109-59, the Safe, Accountable, 


Public Law No.109Œ59, §§ 4101(c)(1), 4124, 119 Stat. 1144, 1715, 

1736Œ37 (2005), as amended by Moving Ahead for Progress in 

the 21st Century, Pub. L. No.112Œ141, §§ 32603(c) and 32604 (c)(1) 

(2012), 49 U.S.C. §31313 (2006), as amended. 
 ROLES IN AUTOMATION: FEDERAL
    9FMCSA and the States on how or whether CDL 


driving systems.
Considering Changes to Existing 

FMCSA is in the process of broadly considering 


regulations to accommodate the introduction 

of ADS in commercial motor vehicles. As noted 

above, some FMCSA regulatory requirements for 





but many regulations, such as those involving 

inspection, repair, and maintenance 

requirements, can be readily applied in the 



motor coaches. Current FMCSRs would continue 

to apply, and motor carriers can seek regulatory 

relief if necessary. Carriers therefore may deploy 

ADS-equipped CMVs in interstate commerce, 


In adapting its regulations to accommodate 
automated vehicle technologies, FMCSA 

will seek to make targeted rule changes and 

interpretations, and will supplement its rules as 



between human operators and computer 

operators. FMCSA is soliciting feedback through 

various mechanisms to understand which 

parts of the current FMCSRs present barriers 

to advancing ADS technology. FMCSA plans 
Automated vehicles could have implications 

for the millions of Americans who 

perform driving-related jobs or work in 

related industries. There is a high level of 

uncertainty regarding how these impacts 

will evolve across job categories with 

differing levels of driving and non-driving 



transportation technologies suggests 

that there will be new and sometimes 

unanticipated business and employment 

opportunities from automation. For 



automobile ownership after World War 

II led not only to direct employment in 

vehicle manufacturing and servicing, but 



and insurance, and ultimately to larger 

shifts in American lifestyles that created 

a wave of demand for tourism, roadside 

services, and suburban homebuilding. 

Automation will create jobs in programming, 

cybersecurity, and other areas that will likely 
Workforce and Labor
create demand for new skills and associated 

education and training. At the same time, 

the Department is also aware of the need 

to develop a transition strategy for manual 

driving-based occupations. U.S. DOT is 

working with other cabinet agencies on a 

comprehensive analysis of the employment 

and workforce impacts of automated 

vehicles. Individual operating administrations 

within the Department have also begun 

reaching out to stakeholders and sponsoring 

research on workforce issues affecting their 

respective modes of transportation. 
Entities involved in developing and 
deploying automation technologies may 

want to consider how to assess potential 

workforce effects, future needs for new skills 

and capabilities, and how the workforce 

will transition into new roles over time. 

Identifying these workforce effects and 

training needs now will help lead to an 

American workforce that has the appropriate 

skills to support new technologies.
to update regulations to better accommodate 

ADS technology with stakeholder feedback 

and priorities in mind. FMCSA will also consider 

whether there is a reasonable basis to adapt its 

CDL regulations for an environment in which the 


Finally, FMCSA recognizes emerging concerns 

and uncertainty around potential impacts of 



working with the Department of Labor to assess 

the impact of ADS on the workforce, including 

the ability of ADS to mitigate the current driver 
10     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 shortage in the motor carrier industry. The 
study will also look at longer-term needs for 

future workforce skills and at the demand for 

a transportation system that relies on ADS 

technology.

 Control Devices 
U.S. DOT recognizes that the quality and 

uniformity of road markings, signage, and other 



driving by both human drivers and automated 

vehicles.  
As part of its role to support State and local 
governments in the design, construction, and 

maintenance of the Nation™s roads, FHWA 



Control Devices (MUTCD).
22 The MUTCD is 


control devices installed on any street, highway, 

bikeway, or private road open to public travel. 



signals, markings, and other devices used to 



and other facilities. FHWA, in partnership with 

key stakeholder associations and the practitioner 

community, is conducting research and device 



to the manual, and to better understand the 








the updated MUTCD will help humans and 

emerging automated vehicles to interpret the 

roadway. FHWA will use current research to 

supplement knowledge regarding different 

sensor and machine vision system capabilities 


As part of this effort, FHWA will pursue an 

update to the 2009 MUTCD that will take 

into consideration these new technologies 
and other needs.
  FTA™s Safety Authority Over Public 
Transportation  
Safety issues are the highest priority for all 
providers of public transportation. In recent 





Agency™s role as a safety oversight regulatory 

body.
23 Consequently, FTA developed and 
published a National Public Transportation 

Safety Plan (NSP).
24
strategic plan and primary guidance document 

for improving transit safety performance; a 

policy document and communications tool; 

and a repository of standards, guidance, best 
practices, tools, technical assistance, and other 

resources.  
A key foundational component of FTA™s safety 
authority is the new Public Transportation 

Agency Safety Plan (PTASP) rule.
25 The PTASP 
rule, which FTA issued on July 18, 2018, and 

which becomes effective on July 19, 2019, is 

applicable to transit agencies that operate rail 



agencies must develop, certify, and implement 

an agency safety plan by July 20, 2020. The 

PTASP rule requires transit agencies to 

incorporate Safety Management System (SMS) 

policies and procedures as they develop their 

individual safety plans. The PTASP rule sets 



transportation agencies by requiring them 

to establish appropriate safety objectives; to 

identify safety risks and hazards and to develop 

plans to mitigate those risks; to develop and 

implement a process to monitor and measure 

their safety performance; and to engage in safety 

promotion through training and communication. 

An overview of the PTASP is available here: 

https://www.transit.dot.gov/PTASP.

to evaluating the safety impacts of automated 

buses. 
FTA recognizes that operating 
domains and vehicle types and capabilities 



25 49 C.F.R. Part 673  
ROLES IN AUTOMATION: FEDERAL
    1122 23 CFR 655.603
23 49 U.S.C. § 5329
24 Federal Transit Administration, National Public Transportation 
Safety Plan (Washington: Federal Transit Administration, 2007), 
www.transit.dot.gov/regulations-and-guidance/safety/national-

public-transportation-safety-plan.
Disability, Accessibility, and
 Universal Design
Automation presents enormous potential 
for improving the mobility of travelers 

with disabilities. Through the Accessible 

Transportation Technologies Research 

Initiative (ATTRI), the Department is initiating 

efforts to partner with the U.S. Department 

of Labor (DOL), U.S. Department of Health 

and Human Services (HHS), and the broader 

disability community to focus research 

efforts and initiatives on areas where 

market incentives may otherwise lead to 

underinvestment. 
ATTRI focuses on emerging research, 
prototyping, and integrated demonstrations 

with the goal of enabling people to travel 

independently and conveniently, regardless 

of their individual abilities. ATTRI research 

focuses on removing barriers to transportation 

for people with disabilities, veterans with 

disabilities, and older adults, with particular 

attention to those with mobility, cognitive, 

vision, and hearing disabilities. By leveraging 

principles of universal design and inclusive 

information and communication technology, 

these efforts are targeting solutions that could 

be transformative for independent mobility. 
ATTRI applications in development include 

and virtualization, safe intersection crossing, and 

robotics and automation. Automated vehicles 



those unable or unwilling to drive and enhance 

independent and spontaneous travel capabilities 

for travelers with disabilities. One area of particular 





last mile mobility issues, possibly providing 


transportation or other transportation hubs. 

intelligence (AI), assistive robots, and facial 

recognition software solving a variety of travel-

related issues for persons with disabilities 

in vehicles, devices, and terminals, are also 

included to create virtual caregivers/concierge 

services and other such applications to guide 

travelers and assist in decision making.
12     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 or providing a paper checklist for safety 


agencies with tailored technical assistance as 

they develop an appropriate SMS approach 

to ensuring safe testing and deployment of 
its automated transit bus system.

transit bus operations may introduce, but also 

new types of risks, ranging from technology 

limitations, hardware failures, and cybersecurity 

breaches, to subtler human factors issues, such 

as overreliance on technology and degradation 

of skills. FTA™s transit bus automation research 



Transit Automation Research (STAR) Plan.
26 FTA 
aims to advance transit readiness for automation 

by conducting enabling research to achieve safe 

and effective transit automation deployments, 

demonstrating market-ready technologies in 

real-world settings, and transferring knowledge 

to the transit stakeholder community, among 

other objectives.
The Federal Role in 
 Automation Research


conducting research related to the integration 

of automation into the Nation™s surface 
transportation system. U.S. DOT™s research 

focuses on three key areas:

 U.S. DOT 


unnecessary barriers to innovation, particularly 



In order to identify and evaluate solutions, 

U.S. DOT employs research to establish safety 



rulemaking; develops and implements processes 

to make the government more agile (e.g., 



support the testing and deployment of novel 

technologies); and supports the development 

of voluntary standards that can enable the safe 

integration of automation.
Evaluating impacts of technology, particularly 
with regard to safety. 
U.S. DOT develops 



automation on safety, infrastructure conditions 

and performance, mobility, and the economic 

competitiveness of the United States. The 

Department employs a variety of methods 



on-road testing. The Department also develops 

innovative methodologies to support the 

broader transportation community in estimating 

and evaluating impacts.
Addressing market failures and other 
compelling public needs.
 Public investments 
in research are often warranted to support 


technologies that are not easily commercialized 

because the returns are either uncertain, 



research that responds to safety, congestion, 

cybersecurity, or asymmetric information (e.g., 

public disclosures), or where a lack of private 

sector investment may create distributional 

issues that disadvantage particular groups (e.g., 

access for individuals with disabilities). 
Across the areas outlined above, U.S. DOT 
collaborates with partners in the public and 

private sectors and academia, shares information 

with the public on research insights and 
 

sector research.
U.S. DOT Role in Key 
 Cross-Cutting Policy Issues 
Cooperative Automation and 
Connectivity
Connectivity enables communication among 
vehicles, the infrastructure, and other road users. 

Communication both between vehicles (V2V) 

and with the surrounding environment (V2X) is 

an important complementary technology that is 



at all levels, but should not be and realistically 

cannot be a precondition to the deployment of 

automated vehicles. 
26 Federal Transit Administration, Strategic Transit Automation 
Research Plan, Report No. 0116 (Washington: Federal 
Transit Administration, 2018), www.transit.dot.gov/research-

innovation/strategic-transit-automation-research-plan.
ROLES IN AUTOMATION: FEDERAL
    13to pick up or deliver a load. MARAD and 
FMCSA are evaluating how automation 

might relieve the burden on a driver under 

these circumstances, and, in particular, the 

regulatory and economic feasibility of using 

automated truck queueing as a technology 

solution to truck staging, access, and parking 

issues at ports. The study will investigate 

whether full or partial automation of 

queuing within ports could lead to increased 

productivity by altering the responsibilities 

and physical presence of drivers, potentially 

allowing them to be off-duty during the 

loading and unloading process.
Automation to Support Intermodal Port Facility Operations
Automation has the potential to transform 

the Nation™s freight transportation system, a 

vital asset that supports every sector of the 

economy. Intermodal port facilities could 



enabling more seamless transfers of 



operators. The Maritime Administration 



how SAE Level 4 truck automation might 

improve operations at intermodal port 

facilities. Currently at many of the Nation™s 

busiest ports, commercial vehicle drivers 

must wait in slow-moving queues for hours 
Throughout the Nation there are over 70 

active deployments of V2X communications 



estimates that by the end of 2018, over 18,000 

vehicles will be deployed with aftermarket 

V2X communications devices and over 1,000 

infrastructure V2X devices will be installed at 

the roadside. Furthermore, all seven channels 



deployments. 
In addition to the Dedicated Short-Range 
Communication (DSRC)-based deployments, 

private sector companies are already researching 

and testing Cellular-V2X technology that would 


An effort led by State and local public-sector 
transportation infrastructure owner operators 

is the Signal Phase and Timing (SPaT) 

Challenge.
27
 This initiative has plans to deploy 
a V2X communications infrastructure with SPaT 

broadcasts in at least one corridor in each 

of the 50 States by January 2020.  Over 200 

infrastructure communications devices are already 

deployed with over 2,100 planned by 2020 under 

this initiative in 26 States and 45 cities with a total 

investment of over $38 million. The SPaT message 




Also underway are the U.S. DOT-funded 
deployment programs such as the Ann Arbor 
27 https://transportationops.org/spatchallenge
14     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 Planned and Operational Connected Vehicle Deployments
Where Infrastructure and In-Vehicle Units are Planned or In Use
ROLES IN AUTOMATION: FEDERAL
    15FHWA is conducting research to measure 


augmenting automated vehicle capabilities 

with connected vehicle technologies 

to enable cooperative automation. 

Cooperative automation allows automated 

vehicles to communicate with other vehicles 

and the infrastructure to coordinate 



safety. It uses a range of automation 

capabilities, including automation 

technologies at SAE Level 1 and Level 



applications include:
Ł Vehicle platooning to enable safe close 
following between vehicles and improve 

highway capacity.
Ł Speed harmonization using wireless 
speed control to reduce bottleneck 

conditions.
Ł Cooperative lane change and merge 


at interchanges.
Cooperative Automation
Ł Coordination of signalized intersection 

approach and departure, using Signal 

Phase and Timing (SPaT) data to enable 



signalized intersections safely and 



fuel consumption.
Current activities focus on technical 



of-concept/prototype tests to understand 



and reduce fuel consumption. FHWA is 

partnering with automotive manufacturers 

to further develop these concepts and 

is conducting modeling and analysis of 

corridors in several States. FHWA may 

pursue further proof-of-concept testing 

on test tracks and on public roads in the 

future. Additionally, studies are underway to 

consider how early automation applications 

like lane keeping and adaptive cruise control 

are being used and accepted by everyday 

drivers.
($72 million) to deploy V2X communications 

throughout the State highways by 2021.
28  Over the past 20 years, the U.S. DOT has 
invested over $700 million in research and 

development of V2X through partnerships 

with industry and state/local governments. 

As a result of these investments and 

partnerships, V2X technology is on the verge 
of wide-scale deployment across the Nation.  
The Department encourages the automotive 
industry, wireless technology companies, IOOs, 

and other stakeholders to continue developing 





Department does not promote any particular 

technology over another. The Department also 

encourages the development of connected 

infrastructure because such technologies offer 


 As IOOs consider enabling V2X deployment in 

their region, the Department encourages 
 IOOs to engage with the U.S. DOT for guidance 

and assistance. 
As part of this approach, U.S. DOT is continuing 
its work to preserve the ability for transportation 





the spectrum with other users in a manner 
Connected Vehicle Environment, Connected 

Vehicle Pilots Program, and the Advanced 

Transportation and Congestion Management 

Technologies Deployment Program, which have 
combined over $150 million in Federal and State 

funding to deploy V2X communications. Finally, 

states such as Colorado are combining Federal-

aid highway program funding with State funding 
28 https://www.codot.gov/about/transportation-commission/
documents/2018-agendas-and-supporting-documents/june-
2018/7-tech-committee.pdf
16     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 that maintains priority use for vehicle safety 
communications. A three-phase test plan was 

collaboratively developed with the Federal 

Communications Commission (FCC) and the 

U.S. Department of Commerce, and the FCC 

has completed
29


potential sharing solutions under these more 

real-world conditions. 
Pilot Testing and Proving Grounds 
U.S. DOT supports and encourages the testing 

and development of automation technologies 

throughout the country with as few barriers as 

needed for safety. ADS developers are already 

testing automated vehicle technologies at test 

tracks, on campuses, and on public roadways 

across the United States. Pilots on public roads 

provide an opportunity to assess roadway 

infrastructure, operational elements, user 

acceptance, travel patterns, and more.  
The Department appreciates that there are 


testing activities occurring in many States 

and locations across the country, and there is 

considerable private investment in these efforts. 

The Department does not intend to pick winners 
and losers or to favor particular automated 

vehicle proving grounds over others. 
Therefore, 
the Department no longer recognizes the 

designations of ten ﬁAutomated Vehicle 

Proving Groundsﬂ as announced on January 
19, 2017. 
The Department has taken no actions 



to those ten locations on the basis of these 

designations, and these designations will 



forward on any decisions the Department may 

make regarding Federal support or recognition 

of research, pilot or demonstration projects, 

or other developmental activities related to 

automated vehicle technologies.
Instead, if and when the Department is called 
upon to provide support or recognition of any 

kind with regard to automated vehicle proving 

grounds, the Department intends to apply 

neutral, objective criteria and to consider all 

locations in all States where relevant research 

and testing activities are actually underway.
Cybersecurity
Transportation systems are increasingly 



integrated functions. Transportation systems 

are also more reliant than ever on multiple 

paths of connectivity to communicate and 



technologies to achieve functional, cost, and 

marketing objectives. 
Surface transportation is a broad sector of the 

economy and requires coordination across all 

levels of government and the private sector 



enable shared situational awareness and allow 



U.S. DOT will work closely with the U.S. 

Department of Justice; the U.S. Department 

of Commerce and its National Institute of 

Standards and Technology (NIST); the Federal 

Trade Commission; the Federal Communications 

Commission; the U.S. Department of Homeland 



and other public agencies to address cyber 

vulnerabilities and manage cyber risks related to 

automation technology and data.
Transportation-related cyber vulnerabilities 


partners anonymously through various 

Information Sharing and Analysis Centers 

(ISACs). 
DHS's National Cybersecurity and 
Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) 
is a 24x7 cyber situational awareness, 

incident response, and management 

center that is a national nexus of cyber and 

communications integration for the Federal 

Government, intelligence community, and 
law enforcement.
 If a transportation sector entity deems 

Federal assistance may be warranted, they are 

encouraged to contact NCCIC
30
 and the relevant 
29 Letter to Congress proposing the test plan: https://apps.fcc.
gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-337251A1.pdf 
 FCC Phase 1 test plan:  https://transition.fcc.gov/oet/fcclab/
DSRC-Test-Plan-10-05-2016.pdf
30 https://ics-cert.us-cert.gov/Report-Incident 
ROLES IN AUTOMATION: FEDERAL
    17ISACs (e.g., Auto-ISAC,
31 Aviation ISAC,
32  Maritime ISAC,
33 and Surface Transportation 
ISAC
34).      
Privacy
While advanced safety technologies have 
the potential to provide enormous safety, 



consumers, stakeholders frequently raise data 

privacy concerns as a potential impediment 

to deployment. U.S. DOT takes consumer 

privacy seriously, diligently considers the 

privacy implications of our safety regulations 

and voluntary guidance, and works closely with 



primary Federal agency charged with protecting 



to support the protection of consumer 

information and provide resources relating to 

consumer privacy. The Department suggests 





business information. Additional information is 

available here: https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/

media-resources/protecting-consumer-privacy.
State, Local, and Tribal 
Governments and 

Automation
State, local, and Tribal governments hold 


mobility of road users in their jurisdictions. 

They are responsible for licensing human 

drivers, registering motor vehicles, enacting 



inspections, and regulating motor vehicle 

insurance and liability. They are also responsible 

for planning, building, managing, and operating 

transit and the roadway infrastructure. Many of 



deployment of automated vehicles. 
There are many ways these governments can 
prepare for automated vehicles: 
Ł Review laws and regulations that may create 
barriers to testing and deploying automated 

vehicles. 
Ł Adapt policies and procedures, such as 
licensing and registration, to account for 

automated vehicles. 
Ł Assess infrastructure elements, such as 
road markings and signage, so that they are 

conducive to the operation of automated 

vehicles. 
Ł Provide guidance, information, and training 
to prepare the transportation workforce and 

the general public. 
This section provides best practices and 

considerations for State, local and Tribal 



transportation technologies.  
Best Practices for State 
Legislatures and State 

Highway Safety Officials
A Vision for Safety 2.0 
provided best practices for 
both State legislatures and State highway safety 






commonalities, and elements that States should 

consider including when developing legislation. 

Additional best practices for State highway 



The best practices provided here are not 

intended to replace recommendations made in 

A Vision for Safety 2.0, 
 but rather are meant to 

supplement them. For more information, refer to 

www.transportation.gov/av.
31 https://www.automotiveisac.com/
32 https://www.a-isac.com/ 
33 http://www.maritimesecurity.org/
34 https://www.surfacetransportationisac.org/ 
18     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 Automated Vehicles at Rail Crossings

vehicles and highway-rail grade crossings 

and identify what information automated 

vehicles will need in order to negotiate 

highway-rail intersections, the Federal Railroad 

Administration (FRA) has conducted a literature 

review, engaged with stakeholders, and 

used scenarios to develop and demonstrate 

a concept of operations, including system 

requirements (technology and sensors). 
 

represent researchers, manufacturers, transit 

agencies, and infrastructure owner-operators, 



the research with U.S. DOT partners and the 

Association of American Railroads to develop 

a closed loop safety system to support the 

safe interaction of connected and automated 

vehicles with grade crossings.   
Best Practices for State 
Legislatures 
States are taking differing legislative approaches 
and have enacted varying laws related to testing 

and operating automated vehicles. U.S. DOT 

regularly monitors legislative activities in 
 order to support the development of a 

consistent national framework for automated 

vehicle legislation. 
A Vision for Safety 2.0
 recommended that 
State legislators follow best practices, such as 

providing a technology-neutral environment, 

licensing and registration procedures, and 

reporting and communications methods for 





laws and regulations that may be barriers to 



have following distance laws that prohibit 

trucks from following too closely to each 

other, effectively prohibiting automated truck 

platooning applications. 

in 
A Vision for Safety 2.0
, the Department 


following safety-related best practices when 

crafting automated vehicle legislation:
Engage U.S. DOT on legislative technical 
assistance.
 State legislatures are encouraged 
to routinely engage U.S. DOT on legislative 

activities related to multimodal automation 
ROLES IN AUTOMATION: STATE, LOCAL, AND TRIBAL
    19
determine if there is a need for State legislation. 

Unnecessary or overly prescriptive 
State 
requirements could create unintended 

barriers for the testing, deployment, and 

operations of advanced vehicle safety 
technologies. 
U.S. DOT stands ready to provide 
technical assistance to States on request.

voluntary technical standards. 
Different use 

and interpretations of terminology regarding 

automated vehicles can be confusing for the 

public, State and local agencies, and industry. 

In the interest of supporting consistent 

terminology, State legislatures may want to use 

terminology already being developed through 

voluntary, consensus-based, technical standards. 

SAE terminology on automation represents 



the Dynamic Driving Task (DDT), minimal risk 

conditions, and ODD. 
Assess State roadway readiness. 
States may 
want to assess roadway readiness for automated 
vehicles, as such assessments could help 

infrastructure for automated vehicles, while 

improving safety for drivers today. Automated 

vehicle developers are designing their 

technologies with the assumption that these 



infrastructure. There is general agreement that 

greater uniformity and quality of road markings, 
signage, and pavement condition would 
 

automated vehicles.
Best Practices for State Highway 
 


and resulting deaths, injuries, and property 

damage for all road users in their jurisdictions. 

States use this authority to establish and 

maintain highway safety programs addressing 

driver education and testing, licensing, 

pedestrian safety, and vehicle registration and 

inspection. States also use this authority to 



maintenance, crash prevention, investigation 

and recordkeeping, and law enforcement and 

emergency service considerations. 
The following best practices build on those 

A Vision for Safety 2.0 
and provide 

a framework for States looking for assistance 

in developing procedures and conditions for 

the operation of automated vehicles on public 

roadways. For additional best practices, see 

Section 2 of 
A Vision for Safety 2.0
.Consider test driver training and licensing 
procedures for test vehicles. 
States may 
consider minimum requirements for test 

drivers who operate test vehicles at different 
automation levels. States may want to coordinate 

and collaborate with a broad and diverse set 



jurisdictional guidelines for safe testing and 

deployment of automated vehicles.

automated mobility as a service. 
Automated 



people and goods using automated vehicle 

technology. States may consider identifying and 

addressing issues that are unique to companies 

providing mobility as a service using automated 

vehicle technologies. These could include such 

issues as congestion or the transportation of 

minors, persons with disabilities, and older 

individuals.   
Considerations for 
Infrastructure Owners 
 and Operators 
Infrastructure owners and operators are 
involved in the planning, design, construction, 

maintenance, and operation of the roadway 

infrastructure. Infrastructure owners and 



information and guidance on how to prepare 

for automated vehicle deployment and testing 

on public roadways. FHWA is conducting the 

National Dialogue on Highway Automation, a 

series of workshops with partners, stakeholders, 

and the public to obtain input regarding the safe 
20     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 
into the roadway system.
35
 U.S. DOT provides 
the following considerations for infrastructure 

owners and operators, including State DOTs, 

metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs), and 

local agencies. FHWA, in particular, will continue 

to update these considerations as informed 

by continued research efforts, stakeholder 

engagement, and testing. Suggested 

considerations include:
Support safe testing and operations of 

automated vehicles on public roadways. 
State 

DOTs and local agencies want to understand 

under what conditions automated vehicles can 

safely operate in automated mode and how 

they will affect the highway infrastructure and 

surrounding communities. Where testing is 

taking place, State and local agencies should 

consider ways to establish consistent cross-



responders to develop commonly understood 



response plans for automated vehicle testing 

and operation.  
Learn from testing and pilots to support 

highway system readiness. 
State and local 

agencies may consider collaborating with 

automated vehicle developers and testers to 

identify potential infrastructure requirements 

that support readiness for automated vehicles 



automated vehicle operations under varying 

roadway and operational conditions. This 

interaction could assist with identifying what 

balance of capabilities (for both vehicles and the 



of automated vehicles. Testing, research, 

and pilot programs can help State and local 

agencies understand automation and identify 

opportunities to inform transportation planning, 



management.
Build organizational capacity to prepare 
for automated vehicles in communities. 

State and local agencies may need to assess 

their workforce capacity and training needs to 

address new issues that emerge from having 

automated vehicles on public roads. State and 

local agencies will want to work with peers, 

industry, associations, the research community, 

and FHWA to build knowledge of automated 

vehicle technologies and identify technical 

assistance resources. 
Identify data needs and opportunities to 
exchange data. 


information in the roadway environment can help 
35 More information can be found at https://ops.fhwa.dot.gov/
automationdialogue/ 
ROLES IN AUTOMATION: STATE, LOCAL, AND TRIBAL
    21automated vehicles address static and dynamic 
elements that otherwise may be challenging for 

ADS (e.g., work zones, rail crossings, managed 



agencies and industry may work together to 

identify data elements that will help automated 

vehicles navigate challenging, unique roadway 

environments and alter operational behavior in 


Collaborate with stakeholders to review 
the existing Uniform Vehicle Code (UVC). 

Each State creates its own laws governing 



ordinances as allowed in the State. The 



years ago by stakeholders that States can 

consult when considering legislation. 
FHWA 
suggests working with automated vehicle 



enforcement stakeholders to revise the UVC 

to be consistent with automated vehicle 
operations.  
   Support scenario development and 

transportation planning for automation.
 There is uncertainty around how automation 

will change travel behavior, land use, and public 

revenues across the transportation landscape in 

the long term. State and local policymakers must 

wrestle with the effects of automation when 

conducting long-term transportation planning. 

Scenario planning tools allow States and 
 MPOs to review multiple scenarios for how 
automation technologies could be adopted 
 and used, and analyze issues including 

infrastructure investment, congestion, 

operations, and other transportation needs.
36
 To assist in this process, FHWA is supporting 

scenario development for State and local 

agencies to use for incorporating automation 

into transportation planning processes.
Considerations for State 
Commercial Vehicle 

Enforcement Agencies
U.S. DOT recommends that State agencies 
responsible for enforcing commercial vehicle 

operating rules and regulations consider 
 the following as ADS-equipped commercial 

motor vehicles are tested and operated on 

public roads:
Compatibility between intrastate and 
interstate commercial motor vehicle 

regulations. 
State enforcement agencies 
should monitor prevailing regulatory activity, 



including a forthcoming Advance Notice of 



whether amendments of their intrastate 

motor carrier safety regulations are needed 

in order to be compatible with the Federal 

requirements concerning the operation of 
36 For more information on scenario planning, see https://www.
fhwa.dot.gov/planning/scenario_and_visualization/scenario_
planning/
ADS-equipped commercial motor vehicles. 
Ensuring compatibility between intrastate 

and interstate commercial vehicle regulations 

is important for maintaining eligibility for 

grant funding under the Motor Carrier Safety 
Assistance Program (MCSAP).
Continued application of roadside inspection 
procedures. 
State enforcement agencies should 


procedures to identify which CMVs should 



State enforcement agencies should refrain 

from selecting ADS-equipped CMVs solely 

because the vehicle is equipped with advanced 

technology. States can partner with FMCSA as 

it develops appropriate roadside inspection 

procedures and inspection criteria for use in 



movement of such vehicles is not delayed unless 

there are problems that are likely to adversely 

impact safety.
Considerations for Public 
Sector Transit Industry and 

Stakeholders
U.S. DOT offers the following for consideration 
by public sector transit industry stakeholders 

(e.g., transit agencies) when developing, 

demonstrating, deploying, and evaluating 
 transit bus automation:
22     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
Needs-based implementation. 
Transit 
agencies should consider automation as a 



particular problems. Implementation of new 

technologies and service models should not 

be based merely on novelty. Agencies should 

obtain input from stakeholders to determine 

unmet needs and identify potential solutions 

that might be addressed through automation. 

Ongoing dialogue with community residents, 

original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), 

technology developers, integrators, and 

industry associations will help identify the most 

appropriate transit bus automation technology 

solutions for their communities.

Public transportation 


when implementing transit bus automation 





vehicles with advanced driver assistance 

capabilities, such as pedestrian avoidance and 





for a variety of reasons. Integration, test 

planning, contracting, and data management 





providers are conducting pilots of low-speed 

automated vehicles or shared automated 

vehicles. Although these service approaches 




themselves currently have technological 

limitations such as lower speeds and passenger 

capacity constraints.
Workforce and labor. 
An important 
consideration for public transportation operators 

is to begin preparing for workforce changes that 



transit workforce will require new, high-tech skills 

for inspecting and maintaining automated transit 

buses at all levels of automation. The transit 

industry should begin thinking about retraining 

the current workforce to help transit operators 

transition into new roles and to adapt to a 

transforming surface transportation industry. 
Transit agencies should recognize emerging 

workforce needs and requirements, identify 

new future career paths, and conduct 

succession planning in this new, high-
technology environment.
 Transit agencies can 
work with FTA, industry associations, and private 

sector consultants to identify core training 

needs; academic institutions may be able to 

assist in implementing training. 
Complete Streets. 
Transit agencies should 
seek out and work with local partners to review 

complete streets policies and practices when 

planning and deploying transit automation. 

Early consideration of complete streets will help 

make automation-enhanced mobility safer, more 

convenient, and more reliable for all travelers, 

while reducing the overall cost of widespread 
deployment. Transit agencies, MPOs, and local 

governments may seek assistance from industry 

associations, private sector consultants, and 

automation technology developers to create and 

implement complete streets concepts.
37
Accessibility.
 It is critical that all agencies 
considering automated transit vehicles in 

revenue service ensure accessibility for persons 

with disabilities. Although some users will likely 

continue to require the human assistance that 



has the potential to offer improved levels of 

service for persons with disabilities. Transit 

agencies must ensure that infrastructure, such as 

stations and stops, is accessible and Americans 

with Disabilities Act (ADA)-compliant. Transit 

agencies should continue to partner with 

local governments as appropriate to create 

and maintain an accessible environment for 

all travelers. Transit agencies may work with 

industry associations, private sector consultants, 

and technology developers for new accessibility 

tools and solutions such as those in the U.S. 

DOT™s ATTRI. FTA can provide guidance and 


Engagement and education. 
To fully realize 

transit operators, riders, and other road users 
37
 Complete Streets are streets designed and operated to 
enable safe use and support mobility for all users. Those 
include people of all ages and abilities, regardless of whether 

they are traveling as drivers, pedestrians, bicyclists, or public 

transportation riders.
 ROLES IN AUTOMATION: STATE, LOCAL, AND TRIBAL
    23must understand and be wholly comfortable 
with the technology. Transit agencies seeking 

to test and pilot automated transit vehicles 

may wish to develop appropriate messaging 

as well as public engagement and education 

activities to promote awareness, understanding, 

and acceptance of automated transit buses. 

Public-facing technology demonstrations 

can create opportunities for members of the 



technologies. Other knowledge transfer and 

stakeholder engagement activities can help 

align demonstrations and pilots with local needs 



buy-in.
Considerations for Local 
Governments
Local governments control a substantial part of 
the Nation™s roadway and parking infrastructure, 



via zoning and permitting. Local governments 

are closest to citizens. Automation provides an 

opportunity to address local goals, including 

making more land available for housing and 

business, as well as improving transportation 

options for citizens who are not motorists. U.S. 

DOT suggests that local governments may 

wish to consider the following topics as they 

formulate local policies.
Facilitate safe testing and operation of 
automated vehicles on local streets.
 Local 
streets, with their variety of uses, offer a 

challenging environment for automated vehicles. 

As owner-operators of this infrastructure, local 

governments have an opportunity to partner 

with automated vehicle suppliers to test on their 

streets, learn from testing, and be prepared to 

enable safe deployment.  
Understand the near-term opportunities that 
automation may provide. 
In the near term, 

automation provides increased driver assistance 







passenger shuttle tests are also underway. Local 

governments should be aware of these efforts 

and the opportunities that they may provide, 

while being realistic about their limitations.
Consider how land use, including curb space, 
will be affected. 
A shared vehicle environment 

in which automated vehicles are used by a 

number of travelers over the course of a day 



vehicle ownership, leading to less need for 

on- and off-street parking. At the same time, 

such an environment will require curb space for 

pick-up and drop-off activities. There may be an 

opportunity to reallocate curb space from long-

term parking to other uses, including pick-up 

and drop-off. Furthermore, if vehicle ownership 

declines, minimum parking requirements in 

zoning may need to be revisited, freeing up 

land for other purposes. Finally, in such an 
environment, revenue from parking fees and 


Consider the potential for increased 
congestion, and how it might be managed.
 If automation provides a convenient, low-cost 

option for single occupant vehicle trips, it 



some current transit users may shift to lower-

occupancy automated vehicles. Automated 

vehicles may engage in zero-occupant vehicle 

trips, for vehicle repositioning. Automation 
 will also provide new mobility options for 
 people who do not travel much today. Local 

and State governments may need to consider 

appropriate policies to manage the potential 
 for increased congestion.
Engage with citizens.
 Local governments 
 are in an ideal position to engage with 
citizens, to address their concerns and to 

ensure that automation supports local needs. 

Such engagement may include public events 

associated with automated vehicle testing, 

educational forums, and consideration of 

automation in public planning and 
 visioning meetings.   
State, Local, and Tribal Roles 
in Transportation Sector 

Cybersecurity 
State, local, and Tribal governments face 
unique cybersecurity threats that can endanger 
24     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 NIST Cybersecurity 
Framework
See www.nist.gov/cyberframework
critical infrastructure. Transportation systems 
that depend on digital infrastructure are at risk 

when they do not prioritize maintaining security, 

modernizing systems to reduce vulnerabilities, 

and implementing enhancements to increase 



service degradation has occurred when 
technology, people, and processes failed to 

prevent security failures; including data encrypting 

ransomware, other malware, and insider-threat 

activities. To mitigate potential threats, appropriate 

investments in the digital infrastructure that 

supports ADS should include strong security and 

functional testing of the technology, people, and 

processes. As threats evolve, key decision makers 



program in place to assess and manage risk, 

including evaluating technology, key facilities, 

engaged personnel, and security processes. 

Plans to respond to cyber-attacks should be 



management and recovery protocols shared across 

all industry sectors. 
State, local, and Tribal governments play an 
important role in managing cyber risks by 

investing in improvements to cyber defenses and 

infrastructure. Those governments also identify, 

prioritize, and allocate resources to counteract 

cybersecurity threats, especially where a threat 

may affect transportation critical infrastructure. 

U.S. DOT encourages States, local, Tribal, and 

Territorial governments to fully utilize the resources 

provided by United States Computer Emergency 

Readiness Team (US-CERT).
38Local governments 
 are in an ideal position to 

engage with citizens, to 

address their concerns and 

to ensure that automation 

supports local needs. 
The Private Sector 
 and Automation
While the initial development of automated 

vehicle technologies received strong support 

from government-funded research projects, such 

as the Defense Advanced Research Projects 

Agency (DARPA),
39 over the past decade 
private sector innovators have taken the lead 

in developing and commercializing automation 

technologies. Today, private sector leadership is 

critical to advancing the development, testing, 

and commercialization of automated vehicles. 



to be singularly responsible for addressing 

issues introduced alongside new technologies. 


38 See: https://www.us-cert.gov/ccubedvp/sltt
39

(Arlington: Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, 2014), 

https://www.darpa.mil/news-events/2014-03-13.
ROLES IN AUTOMATION: PRIVATE
    25operators of transportation infrastructure, 
regulators and enforcers of transportation safety, 



play a critical, complementary role in engaging 

automation technologies to improve safety and 

meet the public interest without hampering 

innovation. 
In addition to developing and commercializing 
automation technology, the private sector also 

should play a critical role in promoting consumer 

acceptance in two distinct ways. First, companies 

developing and deploying automation 

technology need to be transparent about 

vehicle safety performance. Second, companies 

should engage with consumers through public 

education campaigns.  

and private sector is also critical for helping 

policymakers understand the capabilities and 

limitations of these new technologies, while 

ensuring that the private sector understands 

the priorities of policymakers and the issues 

they face. 
Only by working in partnership can 
the public and the private sector improve 

the safety, security, and accessibility of 

automation technologies, address the 

concerns of the general public, and prepare 

the workforce of tomorrow.
The sections below outline several critical areas 

Demonstrate Safety through 
Voluntary Safety Self-

Assessments
Demonstrating the safety of ADS is critical for 
facilitating public acceptance and adoption. 

Entities involved in the development and 

testing of automation technology have an 

important role in not only the safety assurance 

of ADS-equipped vehicles, but also in providing 

transparency about how safety is being 

achieved. 
A Vision for Safety 2.0
 provided voluntary 
guidance to stakeholders regarding the 

design, testing, and safe deployment of ADS. 



developers should consider when developing 

and testing their technologies. 
A Vision for 
Safety 2.0
 also introduced the Voluntary Safety 

Self-Assessment (VSSA), which is intended to 

demonstrate to the public that entities are: 

considering the safety aspects of an ADS; 

communicating and collaborating with the U.S. 

DOT; encouraging the self-establishment of 

industry safety norms; and building public trust, 



testing and deployment of ADS. Entities are 

encouraged to demonstrate how they address 

the safety elements contained in 
A Vision for 

Safety 2.0
 by publishing a VSSA, as it is an 

important tool for companies to showcase their 

approach to safety, without needing to reveal 

proprietary intellectual property. 
VSSAs allow the public to see that designers, 

developers, and innovators are taking safety 

seriously and that safety considerations are built 

into the design and manufacture of vehicles 

that are tested on our roadways. 
Therefore, 
U.S. DOT encourages entities to make 

their VSSA available publicly as a way to 

promote transparency and strengthen 

 The 

Department currently provides a template for 

one of the elements in a VSSA, which entities can 

use to construct their own VSSA.
40
 NHTSA also 
established a website where entities who have 

disclosed and made the Agency aware of their 

VSSAs can be listed in one central location.
41 Entities developing ADS technology may want to 

consider making available their VSSAs through 

this website.
Incorporate New Safety 
Approaches for Automation 

in Commercial Vehicle 

Operations 
U.S. DOT recommends that motor carrier 
owners and operators consider the following as 



assistance features and ADS in their vehicle 


40 Available at: https://www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.dot.gov/

web_101117_v1.pdf 
41 Available at: https://www.nhtsa.gov/automated-driving-
systems/voluntary-safety-self-assessment 
26     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 Hazardous Materials 
Documentation
The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration (PHMSA) is 



requirements for providing paper 

documentation to accompany hazmat 

shipments, while ensuring that the 

information is readily available to transport 

workers and emergency responders. 
This 
capability may become increasingly 
important as transporters of 

hazardous materials explore the use 
of automation in their operations. 
As 


use of automation to move hazardous 

materials, the ability to create electronic 

documentation also raises the potential 

to electronically transmit information to 



incident. PHMSA is also collaborating 
 with the Environmental Protection 
 Agency on the development of an 

e-manifest system that will digitize the 



material shipments.
FMCSA and PHMSA plan to solicit stakeholder 
input and provide more detailed guidance 

regarding the use of ADS in commercial vehicle 

operations.
System knowledge.
 If a motor carrier of 
passengers or property plans to begin operating 

a commercial motor vehicle equipped with driver-

assist systems and/or ADS, the motor carrier™s 

personnel should understand the capabilities 

and limitations of these systems, as well as 

ODD limitations (e.g., the types of roadway 

environments or environmental conditions under 

which they can operate). The motor carrier should 

also ask the equipment™s manufacturer about 

the capabilities and limitations of these systems. 

Motor carriers may also wish to inquire about 

whether the manufacturer has completed a 

voluntary safety self-assessment, as described in 

A Vision for Safety 2.0
.System functionality. 
Motor carriers should 

ensure the driver assist system and/or ADS is 

functioning properly before activating these 

systems. This functionality should be able to be 

validated during a roadside inspection.
System training. 
Motor carriers should 
implement a training program to familiarize 


drivers with the equipment and how it operates, 

including the procedures to follow in the event of 

an ADS malfunction.
Equipment maintenance. 
Motor carriers should 
be aware of maintenance requirements of driver-

assist systems and/or ADS to enable safe and 

optimal operation. This includes understanding 

self-diagnostic capabilities of the system and the 

status or error messages the system may display.
Information exchange. 
Motor carriers should 

be aware that under certain situations such as 

a safety inspection or roadway crash, it may be 



vehicle performance data with Federal and 



records of the systems it is using, the training 

provided, and the operation of those vehicles.
Safety inspections. 
Motor carriers should 
be prepared to interact and cooperate with 

roadside and other safety inspections of 

driver assist systems and ADS. This includes 

responding to law enforcement instructions, 



malfunction, implementing the equipment™s 

safe shutdown procedures, and demonstrating 

system functionality.
Develop Safe and Accessible 
Transit Buses and Applications: 

Considerations for Private 

Sector Transit Industry
U.S. DOT offers the following considerations 
 for private sector transit industry stakeholders 
when developing, demonstrating, deploying, 

and evaluating transit bus automation:
Accessibility.
 It is important to think about 
how to make automated vehicles and their 
technological capabilities accessible to persons 

with disabilities (including those with physical, 

sensory, and cognitive impairments) early in 
ROLES IN AUTOMATION: PRIVATE
    27the design process. This vital element is more 
easily integrated at the initial stages of vehicle 

research and development, rather than trying 

to incorporate it into the design through 



technology developers, and integrators should 

work with transit agencies, industry associations, 

and the disability community to obtain input on 

functional and performance needs as well as 
the consequent human factors considerations. 





requirements of ADA.
Human factors. 
Consider human factors in the 
design of buses and vehicles for all levels of 



(transit operators, passengers, and other road 

users). The interaction between human and 
machine, ease of use, and comprehensibility 

of human-machine interfaces (HMI) should be 



to maintaining safety under all operating 

conditions. Where possible, technology 

companies should partner with transit agencies 

and passenger organizations to test various user-

interface technologies and designs. 
Testing. 
Open a dialogue and seek a 
collaborative relationship with FTA when 
developing and testing new bus technologies 

and products. FTA can provide guidance, 



requirements, and recommendations as they 

pertain to transit automation.    
Provide Information to 
 the Public
The understanding of automation technologies 

varies considerably across the general public, 

caused in part by a lack of consistency 

in terminology and confusion about the 

technology™s limitations. The public needs 

accurate sources of information regarding 

automation to better understand the technology 

so that they can use it safely and make informed 

decisions about its integration. This can be done 

through direct communications with consumers 

and other users, demonstrations, public 

outreach in areas where vehicles are being 

tested, and a variety of other means.  
28     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
With respect to currently available 
Level 1 and 
Level 2
 automation technologies and 
Level 3 
technologies under development, consumers 

and other users should understand what the 

technology is and is not capable of, when 

human monitoring of the system is needed, and 

where it should be operated (i.e., appropriate 

ODD). The private sector may need to consider 

new approaches for providing information so 

that consumers can use the technology safely 

and effectively. As part of their education and 

training programs and before consumer release, 

automated vehicle dealers and distributors 

may want to consider including an on-road or 



vehicle operations and how humans interact with 

vehicle controls. Other innovative approaches 

(e.g., virtual reality (VR) or onboard vehicle 

systems) may also be considered, tested, and 

employed.
Public education challenges are different for 
automated vehicle technologies at higher levels 

of automation or 
Level 4 and Level 5
 systems, 

where the consumer becomes a passenger 

rather than a driver. For these systems, the 

members of the public may require more 

general information and awareness of what the 

technology is and how they should interact with 

it, either as passengers or as others sharing the 

road with automated vehicles.  
Developers of automated vehicle technologies 
are encouraged to develop, document, and 
An estimated 25.5 million Americans have 

disabilities that make traveling outside 



Bureau of Transportation Statistics report 

Travel Patterns of American Adults with 

Disabilities.
42 An estimated 3.6 million with 
disabilities do not leave their homes.
People with travel-limiting disabilities are less 
likely to own a vehicle or have vehicle access 

than people without disabilities. 
Travel Patterns of American Adults with Disabilities
When people with disabilities do use 

vehicles, they are often passengers. People 

with disabilities are less likely to have jobs, 

are more likely to live in very low-income 

households, and use smartphones and ride-

hailing services less often than the general 

population. An estimated 71 percent reduce 

their day-to-day-travel, while an estimated 41 

percent rely on others for rides. 
Automated vehicles and other assistive 
technologies may provide substantial 



who cannot drive.
42
 Brumbaugh, Stephen. Travel Patterns of American Adults 
with Disabilities (Washington: Bureau of Transportation 
Statistics, 2018), https://www.bts.gov/travel-patterns-with-

disabilities
Compensating Strategies for People with Travel-Limiting Disabilities (age 18Œ64)
Source: 
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 2017 National Household Travel Survey.
ROLES IN AUTOMATION: PRIVATE
    29maintain employee, dealer, distributor, and 
consumer education and training programs to 

address the anticipated differences in the use 

and operation of automated vehicles from 
 those of the conventional vehicles that the 
 public owns and operates today. Successful 

programs will provide target users with the 

necessary level of understanding to utilize these 



safest manner possible. 
Consider All Possible Surface 
Transportation Conditions 

and Different Roadway 

Landscapes
Entities that are testing and operating on 
public roadways will want to consider the 

whole roadway environment, which could 

include different infrastructure conditions 

and operating rules. It will be important to 

account for all possible surface transportation 

conditions an ADS may encounter within its 

ODD. Such conditions, when appropriate, 

include maneuvering at-grade rail crossings, 

roundabouts, bicycle lanes, pedestrian walkways 



areas, entrances and driveways, and other 

potential hazards, especially in different roadway 

landscapes (e.g., urban versus rural). As part 

of their important role in the safety assurance 

of ADS-equipped vehicles, entities are also 

encouraged to consider such conditions in the 
design, testing, and validation of the designated 

fallback method. Entities are encouraged to 

engage with the U.S. DOT and infrastructure 

owners and operators to understand the 



automated vehicles.
Work with All Potential 
User Groups to Incorporate 

Universal Design Principles
The potential for automation to improve mobility 
for all Americans is immense, but if products and 

technologies are not designed with usability by 

a broad spectrum of travelers in mind, it may not 

be achieved. 
U.S. DOT encourages developers and deployers 
to work proactively with the disability community 

to support efforts that focus on the array of 

accommodations needed for different types of 

disabilities, and ways to improve mobility as a 



door to door.
Anticipate Human Factors and 
Driver Engagement Issues
Consider human factors design for surface 


for all road users. Safety risks, such as driver 


stages of design and vehicle development. User-

interface usability and comprehension need 



situations, and in maintaining safety if vehicle 

functions are compromised.  
In addition, it will be important to recognize 
human factors challenges related to driver 

awareness and engagement. Entities could 

consider methods that ensure driver awareness 

and engagement during ADS-equipped vehicle 

testing, to mitigate the potential for distraction, 

fatigue, and other possible risks. 
Testing on public roadways is necessary 
for vehicle automation development and 

deployment. Public trust can be built 

during testing by using an in-vehicle driver 

engagement monitoring system, a second 

test driver, or other methods. It can be helpful 

for entities developing ADS technologies to 

share information with Federal agencies and 

appropriate organizations about the testing of 

user interface technologies and designs. 
Identify Opportunities for 
Voluntary Data Exchanges

the safety and operations of ADS and lead to 

the development of industry best practices, 

voluntary standards, and other useful tools. 
30     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 Work Zone Data Exchanges



and private sector stakeholders. The goal is 



work zone data that infrastructure owners 

and operators can make available as open 

feeds that automated vehicles and others 

can use.
Accurate and up-to-date information 
about dynamic conditions occurring on 



automated vehicles navigate safely and 



and operators maintain data on work zone 










access and use work zone data across various 

jurisdictions.
Several State DOT agencies and private 
companies are voluntarily participating in the 

project, with U.S. DOT acting as a technical 

facilitator. U.S. DOT has been working with 



elements that should be included in an initial 



what types of technical assistance the data 



it over time, and address broader work zone 

data management challenges. 


Automated Vehicle Safety, available at www.

transportation.gov/av/data, the Department 





critical issues that could slow the safe integration 

of ADS technologies. These principles include:
Ł Promote proactive, data-driven safety, 
cybersecurity, and privacy-protection 

practices.
Ł Act as a facilitator to inspire and enable 

Ł Start small to demonstrate value, and scale 
what works toward a larger vision. 
Ł Coordinate across modes to reduce costs, 
reduce industry burden, and accelerate 

action.
The industry as a whole should consider working 

with Federal, State, and local agencies as 

well as relevant standards bodies (IEEE, SAE 

International, etc.) to identify opportunities to 





the safe integration of automation into the 

surface transportation system. This can include 



private sector regarding infrastructure conditions 



entities to enable mutual learning and risk 

mitigation.
ROLES IN AUTOMATION: PRIVATE
    31
privacy
43
business information. 
Contribute to the 
Development of Voluntary, 

Consensus-Based, and 

Performance-Oriented 

Technical Standards

responsiveness to the rapid pace of innovation, 

can encourage investment and bring cost-

effective innovation to the market more 

quickly, and may be validated by private sector 

conformity assessment and testing protocols. 



Standards Development Organizations (SDOs), 

such as SAE International or IEEE, where industry 

participates in the development of voluntary 

standards. Industry and SDOs can continue to 

provide leadership in this area and collaborate 

with each other, as well as with U.S. DOT and 

other stakeholders, to address key issues. 

Areas where industry can support standards 





interoperability, and performance characteristic 


The Department supports the development 

and continuing evolution of stakeholder-driven 

voluntary standards, which in many cases can be 

an effective non-regulatory means to support 

interoperable integration of technologies into 

the transportation system. The Department 

supports these efforts through multiple 

mechanisms, including cooperation and funding 

support to SDOs; cooperation with industry and 

governmental partners; making Federal, State, 



through international coordination. 
Appendix C provides more information 
on key topic areas and work underway in 
standards development for automation.  
 Adopt Cybersecurity 
 Best Practices
It is the responsibility of ADS developers, 

vehicle manufacturers, parts suppliers, and all 

stakeholders who support transportation to 

follow best practices, and industry standards, 

for managing cyber risks in the design, 

integration, testing, and deployment of ADS. 

As documented in 
A Vision for Safety 2.0, 

these entities are encouraged to consider 

and incorporate voluntary guidance, best 

practices, and design principles published by 

NIST, NHTSA, SAE International, the Alliance 

of Automobile Manufacturers, the Association 


43 The Federal Trade Commission maintains oversight over, and 
provides resources related to, protecting consumer privacy. 
Additional information is available at https://www.ftc.gov/news-

events/media-resources/protecting-consumer-privacy 
32     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
other relevant organizations, as appropriate. 
Stakeholders are also encouraged to report 



ISAC
44

threats, and vulnerabilities from internal testing, 



research as soon as possible, and provide 

voluntary reports of such information to the DHS 

NCCIC when and where Federal assistance may 

be warranted in response and recovery efforts.
Engage with First Responders 
and Public Safety Officials



ways to interact with automated vehicles 



emergencies, and special events automated 

vehicles may need to operate in unconventional 



enforcement may need new procedures to 

signal an ADS-equipped vehicle to pull over and 

determine whether the occupant is violating the 

law or using the ADS appropriately. Responder 

personnel across many disciplines (including 



towing) will need training to safely interact 

with partially or fully disabled ADS-equipped 
vehicles at the scene of a crash. Also, laws 

covering distracted driving, operating under the 





or occupants of ADS-equipped vehicles. 

automated vehicles to improve emergency 







effectively, and safely. 
To educate, raise awareness, and develop 
emergency response protocols, automated 

vehicle developers should consider 



when developing and testing automation 

technologies. Through such engagement, 

technology developers could potentially identify 

new applications of automation technologies 

that can enhance emergency response. The 





companies, automobile manufacturers, and 

other stakeholders to build consensus around 

uniform voluntary data-sharing standards, 

protocols, and practices.
Private sector leadership is 

critical to advancing the 
 development, testing, 
 and commercialization of 
 automated vehicles.
44 Including the Aviation ISAC (https://www.a-isac.com/), the 
Maritime Security ISAC (http://www.maritimesecurity.org/), 
and the Public Transit ISAC and Surface Transportation ISAC 

(https://www.surfacetransportationisac.org/)
 ROLES IN AUTOMATION: PRIVATE
    33 U.S. DOT sees a bright future for automation technology and great 
potential for transforming our surface transportation system for the 
better, toward a future with enhanced safety, mobility, and economic 
competitiveness across all transportation modes.
THE ROAD AHEAD 
This section discusses U.S. DOT™s approach to 
moving forward on automation, informed by 



new technologies. 
Automation 
Implementation 

Strategies 

accelerate the integration of automated vehicles 

and to understand their impact across all modes 

of the surface transportation system. The 



into action through these strategies. The 

strategies appear below in roughly sequential 

order, though some may occur in parallel. 

Stakeholders will be engaged throughout 
 the process.  
1. Engage stakeholders and the public 
as 
a convener and leader to address the issues 
automation raises. The Department will engage 
a broad range of stakeholders and provide 

them with opportunities to voice their concerns, 



of automation, to inform future research and 

policy development. U.S. DOT will also work to 



academia, industry, public sector agencies, and 

research organizations.
2. Provide best practices and policy 
considerations to support stakeholders 
as 
they work to better understand automation, how 

it may impact their roles and responsibilities, 

and how best to integrate automated vehicles 



The Department is committed to providing best 

practices and updated policies as supported by 

research and will provide additional and more 

detailed information as the technology develops.
3. Support voluntary technical standards
 by 
working with stakeholders and SDOs to support 
technical standards and policies development. 

When in the public interest, the Department 

will support the integration of automation 

technologies throughout the Nation™s 

 more information.
4. Conduct targeted technical research 
to 
inform future policy decisions and agency 
actions. Research is critical for producing and 

analyzing data to inform policy decisions, 



toward deployment, and evaluating the safety of 

new technologies.
5. Modernize regulations 

regulations and standards may pose challenges 

to the widespread integration of automated 

vehicles. U.S. DOT developed many of its 

regulations over a period of decades, generally 

with the assumption that a human driver would 

always be present. U.S. DOT is in the process 

of identifying and modifying regulations 

that unnecessarily impede the testing, sale, 

operation, or use of automation across the 

surface transportation system.
  THE ROAD AHEAD    35Safety Risk Management 
Stages along the Path 

to Full Commercial 

Integration
In addition to meeting any regulatory or 
statutory requirements, U.S. DOT envisions that 

entities testing and eventually deploying ADS 



best practices, consensus standards, and 

voluntary guidance to manage safety risks along 

the different stages of technology development. 


the variety of entities engaged in developing 

ADS technologies, it is useful to describe a 

general conceptual framework to help provide 

clarity to the public regarding the general 

distinctions between the stages of testing and 

full deployment.  
This conceptual framework provides an 
opportunity for discussion around one potential 

vision for promoting safety, managing risk, and 



adoption of automated vehicle technologies. 

The following description is in no way intended 
to imply that there is only one path for ADS 

development. 
Collaboration is needed among 
manufacturers, technology developers, 
infrastructure owners and operators, and 

relevant government agencies to establish 

protocols that will help to advance safe 
operations in these testing environments.
 ADS developers may decide that this path 

does not make sense for them or that they will 

combine different phases in unique ways, all of 

which the Department fully supports, as long 

as safety risks are appropriately managed and 

all testing is conducted in accordance with 

applicable laws and regulations. Likewise, to 



this framework, it is not intended to provide 

benchmarks for when a developer may move 

from one phase to another, as that is best left to 

the ADS developer.
Development and Early Stage 
Road Testing 
ADS development does not start with public 


analysis are performed prior to on-road testing 

with a prototype ADS to understand safety 

risks and implement mitigation strategies. 

The primary purpose of this stage is to further 

develop the technology (software and hardware). 



that guide general technology development. 

Conceptually, this stage can be characterized by 

these general characteristics:  
Conceptual Framework: 
 Safety Risk Management Stages for AV  
Development 
 and Early Stage 
 
Further Develop the 
 Technology

safety risks and implement 
mitigation strategies
Expanded ADS 
 
 

Technology Within the 

Intended Operational 
 Environment

 system failures, receive 

safety driver feedback, and 


Limited to Full ADS 
 Deployment
 Move Towards Commercial 

Operation and Widely 

Engaging with the Public
validate underlying safety 

assumptions, gather user/

public feedback, and identify 


U.S. DOT ENGAGEMENT
A collaborative approach to discuss key issues
36     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
Ł The system would generally be characterized 
as a prototype that already passed 
laboratory and/or closed-course testing.
45 The hardware and the vehicle platform may 

be comprised of development or rapid 

prototyping-level equipment. 
Ł ADS use cases and associated ADS functions 




are performed in controlled environments 

prior to this stage. The primary purpose of 

this stage of road testing is to validate the 

completeness of use cases and to verify 

that implemented software can perform 

associated functions. 
Ł Controlled environment (track, simulation, 
etc.) testing and software development are 

continuing alongside ADS prototype road 

testing. Known use cases are being tested in 

controlled environments and new use cases 



and stored. 
Ł Development of use cases could include 
initial assessments of a broad range of 

roadway characteristics (e.g., lane markings, 

signage) and operational scenarios (e.g., 

work zones, road weather) to inform ADS 
performance in the roadway environment. 
Ł In conjunction, additional software 
development is taking place in failure 

handling, crash imminent scenario 

handling, and edge case handling (non-

nominal scenarios).
46  Ł Safety drivers serve as the main risk 
mitigation mechanism at this stage. 

Safety-driver vigilance and skills are critical 

to ensuring safety of road testing and 

identifying new scenarios of interest. 
Ł Some safety items (such as cybersecurity 
and human-machine interface) may be 

addressed in alternative ways when 

compared to production systems.
Ł Usually, in addition to a safety driver, an 
employee engaged in the ADS function/

software development track is also present 

in the vehicle. Software changes could 

happen frequently (both for safety-critical 

issues and other reasons) but are tracked 

and periodically harmonized.
Ł Members of the public are not in ADS 
prototype vehicles during early stage road 

testing.  
 Progressing through 
 Testing Stages
The stage of testing and deployment 
of ﬁan ADS in one ODDﬂ does not 

adequately represent the maturity 

of all ADS development activities 
an entity may be pursuing.
 For 





giving limited rides to members of the 

public (e.g., daytime-only, less than 35 

miles per hour, no precipitation, on a few 

streets in a metropolitan area). However, 

simultaneously that same entity may 

be developing its technologies to 



the ODD elsewhere (e.g., to include 

nighttime, higher speeds, precipitation, 

or larger or different geographical areas). 
45 For general guidance in safety of road testing associated 
with these types of systems, see: SAE International, SAE 


4, and 5 Prototype Automated Driving Systems (Warrendale: 

SAE International, 2015), https://www.sae.org/standards/

content/j3018_201503/
46
 These scenarios are more suitable to develop, test, and 
validate in controlled environments for several reasons, 

including testing non-nominal scenarios in naturalistic real-

world environments can involve high risk, probabilities of 

natural encounters are too low, and repeatability of tests is 


Expanded ADS Road Testing
Once the development progresses and 


validated to be generally complete, software 

handling of non-nominal cases is integrated 

into an ADS. The primary purpose of this stage 



in matured software and hardware within 

the intended operational environment and 

observe system failures, safety driver subjective 
THE ROAD AHEAD    37
operational system behaviors. Conceptually, 
 this stage can be characterized by these 
 general attributes: 
Ł The ADS has matured both in terms 
of hardware and software. Information 

necessary to establish a safety self-

assessment should be available and 

reasonably stable.  
Ł Targeted operational design domain is more 


This could include an understanding of how 

the ADS-equipped vehicle interprets the 

standard roadway environment, such as 



dynamic roadway conditions, and other 

users. 
Ł The functional safety approach has been 


risk management controls implemented.
Ł ADS use cases are validated to be nearly 
complete. Implemented ADS functions are 



requirements in both controlled and on-road 

environments. 







to serve as the secondary risk mitigation 

strategy. 
The Role of On-Road Testing in Validation/Verification and 
Safety Assurance
an important part of the overall development 
process in identifying and validating the 

completeness of use cases, gaining statistical 



use cases, and identifying edge cases and 





However, once a new scenario of interest is 



to a library and retested many times in 

controlled environments (simulation, track, 

hardware-in-the-loop, software-in-the-loop, 

etc.) and integrated as part of each software 

update release readiness assessment. 
Advancing an ADS function from prototyping 

stages to production release involves 

numerous development objectives. These 

include the ability for the ADS to perform 

nominal driving functions in known use cases, 

perform crash-avoidance maneuvers, revert to 



and sensor failures, and react reasonably safely 

in edge cases. 
On-road testing cannot 
be expected to address all aspects of 
testing needs towards deployment. 
For 


tests that put systems in imminent crash 

encounters cannot be safely performed in a 

naturalistic environment. On-road testing is 
Ł Depending on the vehicle platform, some 
safety items (such as cybersecurity and 
human-machine interface) may still be 

addressed in alternative ways.
Ł The safety driver may be the only person in 
the vehicle. Time between subsequent safety 



that safety drivers can maintain their 

vigilance in reduced workload is important. 
Ł Members of the public are still not in 
 

road testing.   
Limited to Full ADS 
Deployment 
Limited ADS deployment is similar to what the 
public understands as demonstrations. Full 

deployment of automated vehicles represents 



commercially and widely engage with the 

public. The main purpose of this stage is to 



the intended operational environment, validate 

underlying safety assumptions, gather user 


38     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
opportunities in user compatibility areas. 
Conceptually, this stage can be characterized by 

these general characteristics: 
Ł Complete engineering requirements for 


the technology, and internally documented. 

Engineering design reviews are performed, 

and documented.

clearly and ADS operation only takes place 

within that ODD. Relevant ODD elements 
 are monitored to ensure full coverage. Any 





are documented, and are appropriately 

communicated when applied as a software 

update in deployed units.
Ł Near-full software, hardware, system 
 

have been carried out with near 
 production hardware.
Ł Software is stable. Software changes are 


major change goes through new release 

readiness testing.





(including remote safety drivers) may still 

be used, but their roles are limited and 

may eventually be eliminated. Risk-based 
 assessments are performed to assure safety 

of these approaches.
Ł Safety and key performance indicators are 
set and monitored.
Ł All safety items (including cybersecurity and 
human-machine interface) are addressed in a 

production manner.
Ł Members of the public are allowed in ADS-
equipped vehicles on public roads, initially 

on a limited basis.
Ł Systems move toward full operation by being 
offered for sale, lease, or rent (to include 

free ridesharing) or otherwise engaged in 

commerce in the form of the transport of 

goods or passengers.



State and local agencies know of operational 

protocols and administrative procedures 

following a crash or other roadway event 

related to an ADS-equipped vehicle in 
 the ODD.
Engaging with U.S. DOT along 
 the Way
As ADS developers move along their respective 

paths from development to full commercial 

integration, it is useful to identify opportunities 

to further engage with U.S. DOT and the broader 

stakeholder community. The path discussed 


phases of testing and deployment, with sample 



framework can help lay out points at which the 

U.S. DOT, ADS developers, and stakeholders 

can engage with each other throughout the 

technology development process and align 

to prioritize safety and manage risks. Rather 

than waiting to interact at the very end of the 

technology development cycle, the U.S. DOT 

prefers a collaborative approach for working with 

industry to address and solve major challenges 

together, where possible.  
In the near-term, the U.S. DOT and its modal 
agencies will continue to pursue its safety 




 has authority over the safety of ADS-equipped 

vehicles, including establishing Federal safety 

standards for new motor vehicles and addressing 

known safety defects in motor vehicles and 

motor vehicle equipment. 
 FMCSA™s oversight begins once the vehicles 
 are placed into commercial operation in 

interstate commerce, whether for hire or as a 

private motor carrier, on public roadways. At that 

point, certain regulations designed to ensure 

safe operation apply.  

light vehicles, transit vehicles, and the motor 




THE ROAD AHEAD    39or Level 5 driverless CMVs, those carriers with 
Level 3 or lower ADS-equipped CMVs that still 

have a human driver present, and carriers using 

only traditional non-ADS-equipped vehicles 

will at times be sharing the roadways. Some 



ADS-equipped vehicles in deployment will 

represent an even broader array of operational 

design domains. As a result, the U.S. DOT and 

its State and local partners will need to adapt 

enforcement practices and other processes to 

new and rapidly developing ADS technology, 

while also continuing to ensure safe operation of 

conventional human driven vehicles. This will be 

an important area for stakeholders to work with 

the U.S. DOT going forward.  
Moving Forward
In the long term, the U.S. DOT will pursue 

strategies to address regulatory gaps or 

unnecessary challenges that inhibit a safe and 

reasonable path to full commercial integration. 

The operating agencies within the U.S. DOT 

will be working together and with stakeholders 



environment to accommodate the safe 

development and integration of 
 ADS technology.  
Looking ahead, the U.S. DOT encourages 
stakeholder engagement in several areas as 
it pursues its long-term vision of modernizing 

regulations and supporting the path to full ADS 

commercialization:  
Ł NHTSA

motor vehicle regulatory barriers and other 

unnecessary barriers to the introduction and 



is developing an ANPRM to determine 



while enabling innovative vehicle designs. 



modifying requirements that would no 

longer be appropriate if a human driver is 

not operating the vehicle. NHTSA previously 

published a Federal Register notice 

requesting public comment on January 

18, 2018. NHTSA is issuing an ANPRM 

requesting public comments on designing a 

national pilot program that will enable it to 

facilitate, monitor, and learn from the testing 

and development of emerging advanced 

driving technologies and to assure the safety 

of those activities.
Ł FMCSA 

ADS, particularly to identify regulatory 

gaps, including in the areas of inspection, 

repair, and maintenance for ADS. FMCSA 

anticipates considerable public interest and 

participation in this rulemaking effort, which 

will include an opportunity for formal written 

public comments as well as multiple public 

listening sessions. 
 FMCSA is in the process of developing 
policy recommendations to address ADS 

technology. Through public listening 

sessions, the Agency hopes to solicit 

information on issues relating to the design, 

development, testing, and integration of 

ADS-equipped commercial motor vehicles. 



date and learn more about the perspective 



as it considers future guidance.
Ł FTA 

resources to support the commercialization 

of innovative solutions in transit automation. 

As part of this research, FTA will assess 

areas of potential regulatory and other 



FTA funding eligibility and technology 

procurement requirements, as well as ADA 

compliance. Currently, FTA is preparing 

guidance to provide stakeholders with clarity 



testing, and deploying automated transit 

buses.
Ł FHWA 
will continue to work with 
stakeholders through its National Dialogue 

and other efforts to address the readiness 
 of the roadway infrastructure to support 

ADS-equipped vehicles. It is reviewing 


 

such as signage, and plans to update the 


40     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
Stakeholders are encouraged to engage 
directly with the Department where and when 

possible to support collaboration. It will be 

important to gather information and feedback 

from the stakeholder community, including 

ADS developers, commercial motor vehicle 

carriers, transit agencies, infrastructure owners 

and operators, the public, and other groups to 

jointly address key challenges and promote safe 

technology development and deployment.   
Conclusion
Over the past century, motor vehicles have 



including widespread access to jobs, goods, and 

services. They have also helped connect many 

of the most remote and isolated regions of the 

country to the larger economy. Along with these 



risks and other challenges. Motor vehicle crashes 

remain a leading cause of death in the United 

States, with an estimated 37,133 lives lost on U.S. 

roads in 2017. Automation has the potential to 

improve the safety of our transportation system, 

improve our quality of life, and enhance 
 mobility for Americans, including those who do 

not drive today.  
Many Americans remain skeptical about the 
notion that their car could one day be driving 

itself, rather than being driven by humans. 



consumers will choose to interact with these 
 technologies. Therefore, the U.S. DOT will not 

rush to regulate a nascent and rapidly evolving 

technology. Instead, 
the Department supports 
an environment where innovation can thrive 

and the American public can be excited and 



With 
AV 3.0, 
U.S. DOT acknowledges the need 

about new ways to deliver on our mission. 

The Department will work with partners and 

stakeholders in government, industry, and the 

public to provide direction, while also remaining 



needs. Wherever possible, U.S. DOT will 
partner with industry to develop voluntary 

consensus-based standards and will reserve non-

prescriptive, performance-based regulations 

for when they are necessary. The Department 

will work to assess and minimize the possible 



technology across the Nation.
Regarding the integration of automation into 
professional driving tasks, lessons learned 



the introduction of automated systems may 

be instructive and inform the development of 

thoughtful, balanced approaches. These are 

not perfect comparisons, but are still worth 

considering (See Learning from the History of 
THE ROAD AHEAD    41Automation in Aviation). The aviation industry 
discovered that automation required careful 

consideration of human factors, but led to 

improved safety ultimately. This transition also 

did not result in the elimination of pilot jobs, as 

some had feared.  
Despite the great promise of automation 
technology, important questions remain. For 



how can safety be improved? How will people 

interact with these technologies? What happens 

when a human vehicle operator switches to or 

from an automated driving mode? As automated 

driving technologies develop, how will the 

Nation™s 3.8 million professional drivers be 

affected? Which regulatory obstacles need to be 

removed? What opportunities and challenges 

does automation present for long-range regional 

planning? Will automation lead to increased 

urban congestion?
U.S. DOT sees a bright future for automation 
technology and great potential for transforming 

our surface transportation system for the better, 

toward a future with enhanced safety, mobility, 

and economic competitiveness across all 

transportation modes. 
Learning from the History of Automation in the 
 Aviation Workforce
The aviation industry developed technological 
solutions to help airline pilots manage factors 

such as high workload, distractions, and 

abnormal situations. Innovation at that time 

eventually led to the introduction of autopilot, 



alerting systems, and more. In part because 

of these innovations, the safety record 


47 Early 
automation technology in aviation performed 





conventional cruise control systems offered 

on most passenger cars today. Pilots readily 

accepted these systems because they reduced 

their workload and were easy to understand. 
As computer technology became more 








operations. This increased automation came at 
a cost. It became harder for pilots to understand 

what the automated systems were doing, yet 

they remained responsible for taking over when 

the automated systems reached the limits of 

their operating domains or malfunctioned. Pilots 

were also encouraged to use automation to the 




Systems that alert pilots to hazardous conditions 




offered in many passenger cars) have also 



initial challenges. Early alert systems sometimes 

had a high number of false alarms, so pilots did 

not trust them. Many improvements were made, 

such as better algorithms, better sensors, and 

improved and standardized display of alerts (and 



improvements have led to more reliable alerts and 

pilots are more willing to heed them.  

supporting pilots. The characteristics that have 

improved trust in and effectiveness of these 

systems include:
Ł Reliable, robust systems that minimize false 
or missed alarms/reports. 
47 Federal Aviation Administration, Operational use 

Performance-based operations Aviation Rulemaking 

Committee/Commercial Aviation Safety Team, Flight 



Aviation Administration, 2013), https://www.faa.gov/

aircraft/air_cert/design_approvals/human_factors/media/

OUFPMS_Report.pdf.
42     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
Ł Pilot interfaces that are easy to understand 
and enhance awareness. 
Ł Training to understand how the systems 
work (and how to operate them).
Ł Avoidance of skill degradation by 

and basic skills.
In the early days of aviation automation, 
many pilots worried that autopilot functions 

would completely replace them. Yet today, 

pilots are still paid well, highly regarded, 

and very much in demand. Although aviation 

is still undergoing technological changes, 

including increased automation of many 



shows that the transition from a mode of 

transportation of primarily human operation 

to one where humans and automated 

systems share in the vehicle's operation 

can occur in ways that dramatically increase 
safety while minimizing social disruption.
 THE ROAD AHEAD    43 U.S. DOT supports an environment where innovation can thrive 
 
 about the future of transportation.
APPENDIX
 AKEY TERMS AND ACRONYMS 
 Adaptive Cruise Control:
 A driver assistance system that automatically 
adjusts a vehicle™s speed to maintain a set following distance from the 
vehicle in front. (NHTSA)
ADS-Dedicated Vehicle: 

a Level 4 or Level 5 ADS for all trips. (SAE J3016)

Advanced Driver-Assistance Systems (ADAS): 
Systems designed to help 
drivers with certain driving tasks (e.g., staying in the lane, parking, avoiding 

collisions, reducing blind spots, and maintaining a safe headway). ADAS are 

generally designed to improve safety or reduce the workload on the driver. 

With respect to automation, some ADAS features could be considered SAE 

Level 1 or Level 2, but many are Level 0 and may provide alerts to the driver 

with little or no automation.
Automation: 
Use of electronic or mechanical devices to operate one or 

to all modes.
Automated Driving System (ADS): 
The hardware and software that are 
collectively capable of performing the entire Dynamic Driving Task on a 





driving automation system. (SAE J3016)
Automated Vehicle: 
Any vehicle equipped with driving automation 



Commercial Motor Vehicle: 
Any self-propelled or towed motor vehicle 

used on a highway in interstate commerce to transport passengers or 

property when the vehicle:
(1) Has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating, or 
gross vehicle weight or gross combination weight, of 4,536 kg (10,001 

pounds) or more, whichever is greater; or
(2) Is designed or used to transport more than 8 passengers (including the 
driver) for compensation; or
(3) Is designed or used to transport more than 15 passengers, including 
the driver, and is not used to transport passengers for compensation; or
(4) Is used in transporting material found by the Secretary of 
Transportation to be hazardous under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and transported 

in a quantity requiring placarding under regulations prescribed by the 

Secretary under 49 CFR, subtitle B, chapter I, subchapter C. (FMCSA, 


Cooperative Automation: 
Ability for automated vehicles to communicate 

with each other and with infrastructure to coordinate their movements.
Cooperative Lane Change and Merge: 
A dynamic driving task for 
automated vehicles that uses communications to enable negotiations 

between vehicles to provide safe gaps for manual or automated lane 

change or merge maneuver on a roadway. (FHWA)
Driver Assistance Technologies: 
Cameras and sensors in vehicles that 
help drivers see more than they can with the naked eye and warn of a 

possible collision. Driver assistance technologies can help drivers with 
 KEY TERMS AND ACRONYMS    45backing up and parking, maintaining safe distance from other vehicles, 
preventing forward collisions, and navigating lanes safely. (NHTSA)
Driving Automation System or Technology: 
The hardware and software 
that are collectively capable of performing part or all of the Dynamic 

Driving Task on a sustained basis; this term is used generically to describe 

any system capable of Level 1Œ5 driving automation. (SAE J3016)
Dynamic Driving Task (DDT): 
All of the real-time operational and tactical 


strategic functions such as trip scheduling and selection of destinations and 

waypoints. (SAE J3016)
DDT Fallback: 
The response by the user or by an ADS to either perform 
the DDT or achieve a minimal risk condition after occurrence of a DDT 

performance-relevant system failure(s) or upon Operational Design Domain 


GlidePath:
 A prototype application of signalized approach and departure 
that has been demonstrated to stakeholders. (FHWA)

Hazardous Material: 
The Secretary shall designate material (including 




and compressed gas) or a group or class of material as hazardous when 

the Secretary determines that transporting the material in commerce in a 

particular amount and form may pose an unreasonable risk to health and 


Human-in-the-loop:
 Intermittent remote operation or intervention by a 
human of an automated or autonomous vehicle for emergency or special 
handling reasons. (FRA)

A condition to which a user or an ADS may bring 
a vehicle after performing the DDT fallback in order to reduce the risk of a 

crash when a given trip cannot or should not be completed. (SAE J3016)

The subtasks of the DDT 

that include monitoring the driving environment (detecting, recognizing, 

and classifying objects and events and preparing to respond as needed) 



needed to complete the DDT and/or DDT fallback). (SAE J3016)
Operational Design Domain (ODD): 

which a given driving automation system or feature thereof is designed to 
function, including, but not limited to, driving modes. This can incorporate 



roadways. (SAE J3016)

A driver who is not seated in a 

transmission gear selection input devices (if any) but is able to operate the 

vehicle. (SAE J3016)
Signalized Intersection Approach and Departure: 
An automated vehicle 
that communicates with infrastructure using Signal Phase and Timing (SPaT) 
and Map Data Message (MAP) messages to automate the movement of 

single or multiple automated vehicles through intersections to increase 


Speed Harmonization: 

communications between an automated vehicle and infrastructure to 





(FHWA)
Vehicle Platooning: 
A group of automated vehicles that use 
communications to enable negotiations between vehicles to support 

organized behavior and safe close following. (FHWA)
46     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
ADA
 Americans with Disabilities Act
ADS
 Automated Driving Systems
AI


 Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking

 Accessible Transportation Technologies Research Initiative
CDL Commercial Driver™s License
CMV 
Commercial Motor Vehicle

 Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DDT 
Dynamic Driving Task
DHS
 Department of Homeland Security
DOL Department of Labor
FCC
 Federal Communications Commission
FHWA
 Federal Highway Administration
FMCSA
 Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration

 Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations
FMVSS
 Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards

 Federal Railroad Administration
FTA
 Federal Transit Administration
FTC
 Federal Trade Commission
HHS
 Health and Human Services
HMI
 human-machine interface
ICT
 Information and Communications Technology
IEEE
 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
ISAC
 Information Sharing and Analysis Center
ISO
 International Standards Organization

Maritime Administration
MCSAP
 Motor Carrier Safety Assistance Program
MPO
 Metropolitan Planning Organization

 Minimal Risk Condition
MUTCD

NCCIC
 National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
NHTSA

NIST
 National Institute of Standards and Technology
NSP
 National Public Transportation Safety Plan
ODD
 operational design domain

 Object and Event Detection and Response
OHMS

PHMSA
 Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
PTASP
 Public Transportation Agency Safety Plan
PTC
 Positive Train Control
SAE
 Society of Automotive Engineers
SDO
 Standards Development Organization
SMS
 Safety Management System
SPaT
 Signal Phase and Timing

 Strategic Transit Automation Research
U.S. DOT 
U.S. Department of Transportation

United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team
UVC
 Uniform Vehicle Code

 Vulnerable Road User
VSSA
 Voluntary Safety Self-Assessment
 KEY TERMS AND ACRONYMS    47APPENDIX
 BSTAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT 
Since the publication of 
A Vision for Safety 2.0, 
the U.S. DOT has sought 
input from the public through public meetings, demonstration projects, 



for Comment. In March 2018, U.S. DOT hosted an Automated Vehicle 

Summit to discuss the cross-modal issues most critical to the successful 

integration of automated vehicles and provide input to this document. For 

more information, see transportation.gov/AV. 
The most common themes and concerns stakeholders shared with the U.S. 
DOT include:
Ł Consumer and public education:
 Stakeholders agreed on the need for 
improved public and consumer education regarding the capabilities of 

vehicles with different levels of automation. Responses emphasized the 

need to engage a diverse range of stakeholders. 
Ł Data and digital infrastructure: 


for standardized frameworks and enhanced digital infrastructure for 



operation. 
Ł Connectivity: 
Many respondents suggested continued investment 
in research into V2V and V2I communications and their potential to 

complement automated vehicle technologies. Responses noted the need 

for standardized and interoperable communications.
Ł Mobility and accessibility: 
Many stakeholders see great promise in 

the potential for automated vehicles to support the independence of 
people with disabilities by improving the accessibility of mobility options. 

To achieve this potential, stakeholders stressed that innovators and 

policymakers need to engage in an open dialogue with the disability 

community.
Ł Public safety and emergency response: 
Some respondents 

emphasized the need for establishing protocols for emergency 

responders, including emergency overrides to transfer control to a 

human in case of an emergency or equipment malfunction. 
Ł 
Stakeholders recognize that improved roadway 

maintenance, enhanced digital infrastructure, and increased uniformity 

have the potential to enhance automated vehicle operations. However, 

many are concerned about making long-term infrastructure investments 

given the uncertainty about automation capabilities and requirements.
Ł Insurance and liability: 
Respondents raised concerns regarding 

insurance requirements and methods for determining liability.
Ł Cybersecurity: 
Stakeholder responses stressed the need for setting 
cybersecurity standards and establishing models and partnerships to 

mitigate the risk of hacking or intrusions. 
Ł Workforce impacts: 


potential impact of automation on employment, particularly in the motor 

carrier, transit, and rail industries, and encouraged additional research 

into opportunities for re-training and workforce development. 
48     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 APPENDIX
 CVOLUNTARY TECHNICAL STANDARDS 
 FOR AUTOMATION 
Standardization-related needs associated with surface vehicle automation 


adoption. Standardization-related documents can include voluntary 

technical standards published by standards developing organizations 



of documents. There are standards that apply to almost all levels of vehicle 

automation. These include ISO 26262 Road Vehicles Functional Safety and 





standards, but they may not fully address automated vehicle needs. Some 



automation-relevant domains have been developed, but gaps remain 

where activity is underway or anticipated. 
In addition to those standards that support interoperable integration, 
many standards development efforts are focused on describing common 

terminology, required performance capabilities, and interfaces between 

subsystems inside automated systems. These efforts include both 





applicable to subsystems and technologies that are then integrated into 

the overall automation system or surface transportation system. There are 

also sets of published best practices and frameworks that complement and 



the NIST cybersecurity framework describes a holistic approach to 


The Department will continue our cooperative, coordinated approach 

to supporting development of stakeholder-driven voluntary technical 

standards and similar documents across internal modal partners. The 

Department will follow a similar process to the approach for modernizing 

regulation, including:
1. Gather information 
through research, internal analysis, and 
stakeholder engagement on voluntary technical standardization needs. 
2. Explore and execute new approaches
 to meet technical challenges in 
a way acceptable to the broad, diverse stakeholder community. 
3. Work to ease implementation
 of automated vehicle products by 
supporting development of voluntary technical standards, system 

architecture options and user services for the interface between 

vehicles and infrastructure, along with companion software toolsets and 

implementation support programs.
 Means include cooperation and funding support to SDOs, cooperation 
with industry and governmental partners, making Federal technical 


4. Cooperate with stakeholders

North America as well as to take advantage of common international 



regions and markets. 
Vehicle automation systems represent one element of a larger system-of-

systems architecture within surface transportation. Vehicle manufacturers 
VOLUNTARY TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR AUTOMATION
    49control what goes into the vehicle, while infrastructure owners and 
operators control the physical environment where the vehicle operates. 

That infrastructure covers more than the roadway and can include 

communications networks, electric vehicle charging stations, and other 

components. Surface vehicle automation systems have technological 

crossovers and interdependencies. These include considerations about 

software reliability as the degree of software dependency increases. 

Interdependencies are not directly mapped from traditional standards, 



architectures and voluntary technical standards.

vehicle automation, the interests, goals, and perspectives of innovators 

and stakeholders can be used as a basis to categorize the different 


logically dividing the voluntary technical standards landscape into three 

complementary category areas to encompass multiple perspectives. 
As innovators and stakeholders advance the state of the art in automation, 
it is useful to identify those standards that already are available. Table 





In some cases, these standards are applicable globally or multi-regionally; 





organizations whose standardization-related documents are applicable 

domestically and across global markets. There may be ongoing work that is 

not captured below.
Technology Areas
Software
System Engineering

Communications

Position, Navigation and Timing (PNT)

Mapping

Sensing

Infrastructure

Human-Machine Interface (HMI)
Functional Standards Areas


Data

Design

Maintenance and Inspection

Functional / Performance

Protocol (Communications)

Security

Testing / Test Targets

Training
Safety Areas
System Safety
Operational Design Domain (ODD)

Object and Event Detection and 
 Response (OEDR)

Fallback (Minimal Risk Condition - MRC)

Validation Methods

HMI
Vehicle Cybersecurity

Crashworthiness

Post-Crash ADS Behavior

Data Recording

Consumer Education and Training

Federal, State, and Local Laws

Commercial Vehicle Inspection
50     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
   
 
(as of August 2018)
Functional 
Area
Standardization-Related Documents

Architecture



Driving Performance Measures and Statistics 


for Terms Related to On-Road Motor Vehicle 
Automated Driving Systems

Guidelines for Safe On-
Road Testing of SAE Level 3, 4, and 5 Prototype 

Automated Driving Systems 

Active Safety Systems Terms 
 


for the Driver Vehicle Interface (DVI)

Automatic Emergency Braking 
(AEB) System Performance Testing
Ł SAE AS-4 
Joint Architecture for Unmanned Systems 
(JAUS)
Ł SAE AIR5372A:2014 
Information on Brake-By-Wire 
(BBW) Brake Control Systems [pertains to aircraft, 

but may be of use to surface transportation
]Ł National Institute of Standards and Technology 
 (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 1011 I-2.0
 Autonomy 

Levels for Unmanned Systems (ALFUS) Framework

A Reference 
 Model Architecture for Unmanned Vehicle Systems
Ł ASTM Committee F45 on Driverless Automatic 


Systems and software 
engineering Š Software life cycle processes


Ł Automotive Open System Architecture (AUTOSAR) 
Testing
Ł European Committee for Standardization (CEN) 
European Standard (EN) 1525: 
Safety of Industrial 
Trucks Š Driverless Trucks and Their Systems

Intelligent Transport Systems Automatic Vehicles 
 
VOLUNTARY TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR AUTOMATION
    51(Continued) Table 1. Relevant Standardization-Related Document by Functional Area (as of August 2018)
Functional 
Area
Standardization-Related Documents
Data

format for automotive-grade navigation databases, 
jointly developed by automobile manufacturers 
 and suppliers. 
Ł North American Datum 1983 (NAD83)


Ł European Terrestrial Reference System 1989 
(ETRS89)
Ł Chinese encrypted datum 2002 (CSJ-02)

Ł ADASIS Forum vehicle to cloud messaging 
standards
Ł Coordinated Universal Time (UTC)

Ł International Atomic Time (TAI)


Intelligent Transport Systems 
Š Lane Keeping Assistance Systems (LKAS) Š 
Performance requirements and test procedures 

Intelligent Transport Systems 


for applications of cooperative Intelligent 

Transportation Systems

Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
Geographic Data Files (GDF) Š GDF5.0

Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
 Adaptive Cruise Control Systems Š Performance 

requirements and test procedures

Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
Pedestrian detection and collision mitigation 
 systems (PDCMS) Š Performance requirements 
 and test procedures

Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
Low speed following (LSF) systems Š Performance 

requirements and test procedures

Intelligent Transport Systems 
Š Full Speed Range Adaptive (FSRA) systems Š 

Performance requirements and test procedures

Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
 Forward vehicle collision mitigation systems Š 
 

requirements

Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
Cooperative adaptive cruise control (CACC) Š 
 

requirements

Event Data Recorder (EDR)
52     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
  Functional 
Area
Standardization-Related Documents
Design
Ł Federal Highway Administration 
Manual on Uniform 

Ł American Association of State Highway and 

A Policy on 
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets 
 
Ł AASHTO Roadside Design Guide
Ł Joint SAE-AASHTO 
Committee on Road Markings

Road vehicles Š Symbols for 
controls, indicators, and tell-tales

DSRC Systems Engineering 
Process Guidance for SAE J2945/X Documents and 
Common Design Concepts
Maintenance and 
Inspections
Ł Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance (CVSA) North American Standard Inspection Program (roadside inspection 
process for inspecting commercial motor vehicles and drivers throughout North America)
Functional / 

Performance

Report on Unmanned Ground 
 Vehicle Reliability

Considerations for ISO 
 26262 Automotive Safety Integrity Levels (ASIL) 
 

Active Safety System Sensors

Active Safety Pedestrian Test 
Mannequin Recommendation
Ł U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) Military Standards 

882E Standard Practice for System 
Safety
Ł Radio Technical Commission for Aeronautics (RTCA) 
 DO-178C Software Considerations in Airborne 


Ł National Aeronautics and Space Administration 

GB-8719.13 Software Safety Guidebook
Ł Automated Driving and Platooning Task Force of 
the American Trucking Associations Technology and 

Maintenance Council

Robots and robotic devices Š 
Safety requirements for personal care robots 

Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
 Adaptive Cruise Control systems Š Performance 

requirements and test procedures

Transport information and 
control systems Š Maneuvering Aids for Low Speed 

Operation (MALSO) Š Performance requirements 

and test procedures

Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
 

backing aid (ERBA) systems

Road vehicles Š Functional safety
VOLUNTARY TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR AUTOMATION
    53(Continued) Table 1. Relevant Standardization-Related Document by Functional Area (as of August 2018)
Functional 
Area
Standardization-Related Documents
Protocols 
(Communications)
Ł IEEE 802.11X

IEEE Draft Guide for Wireless 
Access in Vehicular Environments (WAVE) Š 
Architecture

WAVE - Security Services for 
Applications and Management Messages

WAVE Š Security Services and 
Message Sets Š Amendment 1

WAVE Š Networking Services

WAVE Š Multi-channel 
Operations



Standard for Ethernet

Standard for Ethernet Š 
Amendments

Serial Control and 
Communications Heavy Duty Vehicle Network

Vehicle-to-Vehicle Message 
Sets

On-Board System 
Requirements 
 for Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) Safety Communications

Vulnerable Road User Safety 
Message Minimum Performance Requirements

Candidate Improvements to 
 Dedicated Short Range Communications Message 
Set Dictionary [SAE J2735] Using Systems Engineering 

Methods

Time-Triggered Ethernet

Ethernet)
Ł Association of Radio Industries and Businesses (ARIB) 


communications)
Ł ARIB STD-T110 
Dedicated Short Range 
Communications (Japan) Basic Application Interface 
Ł ARIB STD-T88 
Dedicated Short Range 
Communications (Japan) Application Sublayer
Security

Cybersecurity Guidebook for 
Cyber-Physical Vehicle Systems
Ł NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF)

Cybersecurity Framework
Ł International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 
62443 Industrial communication networks Š 
Network and system security

Information technology Š Security 
techniques Š Evaluation criteria for information 
technology (IT) Security

Information Technology Š 
Security Techniques Š Guidance for the production 
 

Information technology Š 
Security techniques Š Methodology for IT security 

evaluation
54     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
   
  Functional 
Area
Standardization-Related Documents
Testing/Test 
Target



Visual Behavior Using Video Based Techniques

Guidelines for Safe On-
Road Testing of SAE Level 3, 4, and 5 Prototype 

Automated Driving Systems 

Driver-Vehicle Interface 
Considerations for Lane Keeping Assistance 

Systems


for the DVI


Automated Driving and Related Research Topics

Functional Safety of Electrical/
Electronic/Programmable Electronic Safety-related 

Systems

Intelligent Transport Systems 
Š Lane keeping assistance systems (LKAS) Š 

Performance requirements and test procedures

Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
Adaptive Cruise Control Systems Š Performance 

requirements and test procedures

Intelligent Transport Systems 
Š Pedestrian detection and collision mitigation 

systems (PDCMS) Š Performance requirements and 

test procedures

Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
Low speed following (LSF) systems Š Performance 

requirements and test procedures

Intelligent Transport Systems 
 Full Speed Range Adaptive Cruise Control (FSRA) 
 
systems Š Performance requirements and 
 test procedures

Intelligent Transport Systems 
Š Forward vehicle collision mitigation systems Š 



Intelligent Transport Systems Š 
Cooperative adaptive cruise control systems (CACC) Š 

Performance requirements and test procedures
VOLUNTARY TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR AUTOMATION
    55(Continued) Table 1. Relevant Standardization-Related Document by Functional Area (as of August 2018)
Functional 
Area
Standardization-Related Documents
Testing/Test 
Target
Architecture/Software

Software and systems engineering Š Software testing
56     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
   
 As automation technologies advance, additional needs may become evident that are not covered by currently available standards. Those needs 




 
(as of August 2018)
Topic Area
Functional Needs
Standardization-Related Activities
Cooperative 
Situational 

Awareness
ŁNeed to utilize perception systems from other 
 surface vehicles and infrastructure systems to 
overcome sensor occlusion and range.
ŁSENSORIS, ADASIS Forum
 
Performance Requirements for 
Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control and Platooning

On-Board System Requirements for 
LTE V2X V2V Safety Communications
Cybersecurity 
Framework
ŁDescribe best practices
 ŁCover aspects of identify, respond, recover, protect, 
  and detect for vehicles and infrastructure
ŁAuto-ISAC Best Practices
 
 (RFP released winter 2017)
ŁNational Cooperative Highway Research 
 
Management Systems research project

 Data Roundtable
ŁAmerican Trucking Association Technology and 
 Maintenance Council

for Automotive Cybersecurity Best Practices
Data sharing: 
Scenarios
ŁProvide common set of parameters and interface 
 
ŁPegasus Open-Simulation Interface
 ŁITS JPO Data Program ADS Data Roundtable
 ŁInternational work on standards harmonization
 VOLUNTARY TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR AUTOMATION
    57(Continued) Table 2: Known Current Standards Development Activities Relevant to Automated Surface Vehicles (as of August 2018)
Topic Area
Functional Needs
Standardization-Related Activities
Communications 
Performance
ŁAssure required reliability and availability of wireless 
 communications links

DSRC Requirements for V2V 
 Safety Awareness


Requirements for Vehicle-to-
Infrastructure (V2I) Weather Applications


DSRC Messages for Traveler 
Information and Basic Information Delivery


Performance Requirements for 
CACC and Platooning 
DVI Guidelines
ŁDesign for all user types including those with 
 disabilities
ŁIdentify different driver states
 




ADS-DV User Issues for Persons 
 with Disabilities


Automated Vehicles 
and DVI Challenges Committee
Emergency 

Vehicle 

Interaction
ŁV2V/V2I or other communication/sensing techniques 
 
 emergency vehicles

 Safety Awareness
Encrypted 

Communications
ŁSome communications can be signed and some will 
 need to be encrypted

Standard for Wireless Access in 
Vehicular Environments Š Security Services for 
Applications and Management Messages


Event Data 
Recorder
ŁData elements for crash reconstruction and 
 
ŁSAE Event Data Recorder Committee
 58     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
  Topic Area
Functional Needs
Standardization-Related Activities
Functional 
Architecture
Ł Encourage interoperability and enable system-level 

 to emerge
Ł SAE On-Road Automated Driving (ORAD)

Automated Driving Reference 
Architecture

Standard for Connected, Automated 
 and Intelligent Vehicles: Overview and Architecture

Standard for Connected, 



Standard for Connected, 
Automated and Intelligent Vehicles: Testing and 


 Ł Other domains: Robot Operating System (ROS), 
JAUS, VICTORY, AUTOSAR
Functional Safety

standards to ensure a safe vehicle design

Road Vehicles Š Functional Safety

Dynamic Test Procedures for 

 and Validation of Automated Driving Systems 


and Validation of Automated Driving Systems 
 ISO/WD PAS 21448 Š Road vehicles Š Safety of 
 the intended functionality
General 
Atmospheric 

Conditions/Road 

Weather
Ł Classify various weather conditions and data formats
Ł Identify ODD boundaries

Ł Identify minimal risk condition and transition 
 of control

Ł Reference model architecture efforts within ISO 

(connected vehicle focus)
Ł NHTSA Testable Cases Project


Related to Automated Driving System Behaviors 
 and Maneuvers for On-Road Motor Vehicles
VOLUNTARY TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR AUTOMATION
    59 (Continued) Table 2: Known Current Standards Development Activities Relevant to Automated Surface Vehicles (as of August 2018)
Topic Area
Functional Needs
Standardization-Related Activities
Global Positioning 
System (GPS) 


ŁDescribe risk mitigations
 

Cybersecurity Guidebook for 
Cyber-Physical Vehicle Systems


Road vehicles Š Functional safety
Infrastructure 



control device 

design
ŁDescribe how tests address functional requirements
 ŁFacilitate discussion between parties
 
procedures


and Response (OEDR) tests
ŁC
urrent joint SAE/AASHTO Task Force
 
Dedicated Short Range 
Communication (DSRC) Systems


Automated Vehicle Technologies on the Highway 
Infrastructure
Interactions with 
Vulnerable Road 

Users (VRU)
ŁIdentify minimal risk condition and transition 
  of control


ŁOngoing activity in SAE lighting committee 
 
Test Target Correlation
Maintenance and 

inspection of 

sensors, software

systems for optimal performance and operations

equipment may provide a guideline for this
Minimal Risk 

Condition

common understanding to enable discussion; it 



between OEMs, regulators, and public
ŁM
RC data elements in EDR enable crash 
 reconstruction

Automated Driving Reference 
Architecture
ŁS
AE Event Data Recorder Task Force
 60     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 Topic Area
Functional Needs
Standardization-Related Activities

Ł Specify the boundaries of the ODD including: road 
 
Ł Boundaries may be set by vehicle capabilities and/or 
jurisdictional requirement or other factors.
Ł American Association of Motor Vehicle 
Administrators (AAMVA) 
Jurisdictional Guidelines 
for the Safe Testing and Deployment of Highly 

Automated Vehicles 
46Ł No known work with standards organizations; 
however, States are believed to have initiatives 

underway (Caltrans, Florida DOT)


Over-the-Air 
(OTA) Software 

Updates
Ł Assess security threats, risks and vulnerabilities
Ł Provision common methods to update vehicle 
software by a secure procedure



Recommendation Secure Software Update Capability 

for Intelligent Transportation System Communication 

Devices 
Sharing of static 
and dynamic road 

segment and 



device data

zones, road closures, SPAT, etc., and static data like 
bus stop locations and crosswalk geometry, and 

laws that originate from roadway owner-operators 

and may be relayed via digital maps
Ł U.S. DOT is convening States that publish work zone 
data and want to harmonize feeds (e.g., Iowa DOT, 

Colorado DOT), standards activity may follow

 Impacts of Connected and 
Automated Vehicle Technologies on the Highway 

Infrastructure

Recommended Practices for MAP/
SPaT Message Development
46 American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators, 
Jurisdictional Guidelines for the Safe Testing and Deployment of Highly Automated Vehicles 
 (Arlington: American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators, 2018), https://www.aamva.org/GuidelinesTestingDeploymentHAVs-May2018/.
VOLUNTARY TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR AUTOMATION
    61 (Continued) Table 2: Known Current Standards Development Activities Relevant to Automated Surface Vehicles (as of August 2018)
Topic Area
Functional Needs
Standardization-Related Activities
Testing 
Approaches
ŁDescribe how tests address functional requirements
 ŁFacilitate discussion between parties
 


testing
ŁS
AE 
 

Guidelines for Safe On-Road Testing 
 of SAE Level 3, 4, and 5 Prototype Automated 
 Driving Systems
ŁP
egasus/AdaptIVe project
 ŁTNO Streetwise methodology
 ŁU.S. Army Tank Automotive Research, Development 
  and Engineering Center (TARDEC) guidelines
ŁDe
partment of Defense Unmanned Systems Safety 
  
47ŁFHWA Test and Evaluation for Vehicle Platooning 
 48
Jurisdictional Guidelines for the Safe 
Testing and Deployment of Highly Automated 

Vehicles
ŁF
HWA and SAE Cooperative Automation Research 
 Modeling and Analysis (CARMA) program
ŁU
S DOT V2I research program DSRC Roadside Unit 
 
Transition of DDT 
Control

 react if no takeover and driver states




ŁSAE ORAD Levels of Automation
 ŁSAE DVI Committee
 47 U.S. Department of Defense, 
Unmanned Systems Safety Guide for DOD Acquisition
 (Arlington: U.S. Department of Defense, 2007), 
 http://www.denix.osd.mil/shf/programs/ssa/references/unmanned-systems-safety-guide-for-dod-acquisition/.
48 Tiernan, Tim A., et al., 
Test and Evaluation of Vehicle Platooning Proof-of-Concept Based on Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control
 Final Report 
 (Washington: U.S. Department of Transportation, 2017), https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/1038.
62     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
 Topic Area
Functional Needs
Standardization-Related Activities
ADS-DV Issues 
for Persons with 

Disabilities
Ł L4 and L5 ADS-Dedicated Vehicles (ADS-DVs) will 
eventually enable persons to travel at will who are 


conventional vehicle

population.

 with Disabilities
VOLUNTARY TECHNICAL STANDARDS FOR AUTOMATION
    6364     PREPARING 
FOR THE FUTURE OF TRANSPORTATION
    
With the development of automated vehicles, 
 American creativity and innovation hold the potential to 
 once again transform mobility.
AV 3.0
 is the beginning of a national discussion 
 about the future of our surface transportation system. 
 Your voice is essential to shaping this future.
